---
title: CBD_as_Food Medicine or Cosmetic_ENG_09102023-Na-22.10
source: CBD_as_Food Medicine or Cosmetic_ENG_09102023-Na-22.10.docx
type: docx_conversion
---

Kai-Friedrich Niermann*, Daniel Kruse*, Dr. Bernhard Beitzke*, Dr. Dr. Gerhard Nahler*
CBD as food, medicine or cosmetic - a legal and scientific assessment

Introduction
In Germany, a decision by an administrative court became known last year that may have implications for the classification of CBD products throughout Europe if regulators in other EU member states rely on this reasoning.
This was preceded by a decision of the German Federal Office for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM), the federal drug monitoring authority, stating that hemp preparations containing CBD were to be classified as medicinal products regardless of the dosage. This would mean that all CBD oils would have to be classified as medicinal products subject to authorisation according to laws on medicinal products, even irrespective of any subsequent approval as a novel food by the European Commission. Below, the argumentation of the BfArM and the Cologne Administrative Court is first summarized. This is followed by a critical discussion, explaining the reasons why, in our opinion, this line of argument is untenable.
The arguments of BfArM and the Administrative Court of Cologne
BfArM had to decide on hemp extracts containing 4% and 10% CBD, respectively. The arguments may be summarised as follows:
an influence on physiological functions is to be assumed even at a daily dosage of 18 mg (as recommended by the manufacturer as a daily dose) according to the current state of scientific knowledge,
a product capable of fulfilling therapeutic purposes is in any case a medicinal product (citing the case law of the German Federal Administrative Court and the European Court of Justice) ,
since the approval of a CBD drug in the USA (Epidyolex) has proven its therapeutic efficacy, a pharmacological effect can be assumed for CBD oils,
the pharmacological effect on the body does not begin abruptly with the dose required for therapeutic efficacy in a particular field of application, but already below this limit and increases with increasing dosage ,
Cannabidiol is not naturally present in food and therefore cannot be ingested with normal food intake.
The court of Cologne first attempts a definition of pharmacological action, referring to the so-called "Borderline-Guideline, MEDDEV 2.1/3, rev.3". This legally non-binding guideline of the EU Commission understands a pharmacological mode of action to be an interaction between the molecules of the substance in question (called ligand) and a cell component usually referred to as a receptor, which can be figuratively described by the "lock-and-key model". The interaction either leads to a direct effect in the body, or the response to another ligand is blocked. However, a definition of pharmacological effect could not be derived from the ECJ's case law.
approved drug with the same active pharmaceutical ingredient
The existence of a newly authorised drug product with the same active pharmaceutical ingredient, the efficacy of which has been tested in an authorisation procedure, at least justifies the assumption that the same substance in another product also had a pharmacological effect and that this effect also was significant.
By way of a per se conclusion (“conclusion from priority”), a therapeutic efficacy of a substance that has been proven in the drug authorisation procedure entitles the assumption of a (significant) pharmacological effect. A product that is capable of fulfilling therapeutic purposes is in any case a medicinal product. This has long been recognized in the case law of the European Court of Justice.
However, on examination of the passages the court refers to in the cited ECJ decisions, one may well doubt their clear interpretation. In Case C-150/00 there had to be assessed the medicinal properties of a preparation containing vitamins and minerals. The ECJ clarified that those substances, which are absolutely necessary in very small quantities for daily nutrition and the proper functioning of the organism, cannot generally be regarded as medicines. On the other hand, it is undisputed that vitamin or mineral substances are sometimes used in strong doses for therapeutic purposes in the case of certain diseases, the causes of which are not vitamin or mineral deficiencies. In these cases, the latter preparations indisputably constitute medicines.
Thus, the chain of references that the German court draws via the higher administrative courts to the German Federal Administrative Court, and to the European Court of Justice, actually results in exactly the opposite conclusion. Even if the therapeutic efficacy within a certain dose range is recognized, an "underdosed" intake (as the court calls it) does not make a drug of that preparation.
CBD not a food
The Administrative Court of Cologne further arguments as follows:  the use of CBD for nutrition was not known and could not be proven by the plaintiff. The plaintiff had either referred to foodstuffs not containing CBD or, insofar as teas made from cannabis flowers or other parts of the cannabis plant are in question, are subject to the narcotics law due to their THC content. According to the available evidence, it is also impossible to supply a comparable amount of CBD via a normal diet. Thus, in contrast to true "dual-use products", a decisive element for demarcation between medicinal products and foodstuffs is eliminated. CBD is a medicinal substance without a food-related purpose.
no limit for the onset of the pharmacological effect
In the current decision, the Cologne Administrative Court is also of the opinion that there can be no fixed threshold for the onset of a pharmacological effect. With reference to its own previous decision, the Administrative Court states: in the case in which a substance with proven drug-typical functions is dosed just below the therapeutic efficacy threshold, there is a presumption that this product also has a pharmacological effect in any case. This is because this effect does not start abruptly only at the onset of therapeutic efficacy but is already present below this threshold. As a rule, the effect of a drug increases with increasing dose, whereby the threshold for therapeutic success is only exceeded at a certain point.
Evidence of pharmacological action
Further, the Court seeks recourse to BfArM that had also endeavoured to assign the properties of a medicinal product to the CBD oils in question, in particular by referring to the authorised medicinal product Epidyolex®, the dosage and the specific use of the substance. By their reasoning it was not necessary to analyse the specific mechanism of action, since this could not be done for plant-based active substances in particular, and in any case, it was unnecessary as the efficacy of the substance in medicinal use was proven. With regard to the question of whether effects of a product on physiological functions, in comparison with foodstuffs, can be scientifically established, this obligation to provide clarification is limited by the peculiarities of the scientific knowledge process. The administrative court examines whether the evidence of a pharmacological effect has been successfully demonstrated by the authority but does not have to procure it by its own.
Critical discussion

Standing case law of the ECJ
Examining the references, the court refers to in the cited decisions of the European Court of Justice, one may well doubt the assumption of a significant pharmacological effect due to the existence of an authorised medicinal product containing the same active ingredient. In Case C-150/00 , the medicinal nature of a preparation containing vitamins and minerals had to be assessed. The ECJ clarified that substances which are absolutely necessary in very small quantities for daily nutrition and the proper functioning of the organism, cannot generally be regarded as medicines. On the other hand, it is undisputed that vitamin or mineral substances are sometimes used in strong doses for therapeutic purposes in the case of certain diseases whose causes are not vitamin or mineral deficiencies. In the latter cases, these preparations indisputably constitute medicinal products.
Thus, the chain of references that the German court draws via the higher administrative courts, to the Federal Administrative Court, and to the European Court of Justice, actually comes down to rather the exact opposite conclusion to that of the court. Even if therapeutic efficacy is recognized, an "underdosed" intake (as the court calls it) for an unstated indication does not make a drug of such a preparation. According to §2 of the German Medicines Act (AMG), a clear disease-related and therapeutic purpose is characteristic of a drug, in addition to an effective dose.
The Federal Administrative Court’s ruling on the "horse ointment" case of May 16, 2007, already speaks a clear language here: "The pharmacological or metabolic effects of a substance only justify classification as a medicinal product if they exceed the "materiality threshold". Thus, if a potentially pharmacological substance is dosed below the documented pharmacological effect, it cannot be a drug."
The German Medicines Act, which already takes into account the amendment of Art. 1 No. 2 of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council by Directive 2004/27/EC, supplements the definition of a medicinal product by function in Section 2 (1) No. 2 by referring to a pharmacological, immunological or metabolic effect of a substance when assessing the medicinal product’s properties.
The interpretation of this definition by the German BfArM and the Cologne Administrative Court contradicts the previous consistent case law of the European Court of Justice.
According to the “garlic decision” of the ECJ, substances may not be classified as medicinal products if, although they act on the human body, they do not have a significant effect on the metabolism and thus do not really influence its functional conditions. In contrast to the broad interpretation of the concept of a medicinal product by name (medicinal product by presentation), which is intended to protect consumers from ineffective products, the functional medicinal product must cover those products only whose pharmacological properties have been scientifically established in individual cases or which can actually demonstrate a therapeutic effect. Moreover, it is not sufficient that a medicinal product has properties that are beneficial to health in general, but it must really have the function of prevention or cure, since there are numerous products generally recognized as food that can be objectively used for therapeutic purposes.
The reference to an authorised drug with an authorised indication and therapeutically effective dose is not valid. A substance can only be a drug if, under practical conditions, the reasonable intake or dose also has a therapeutic (not just pharmacological) effect. For example, the effect of coffee due to the contained caffeine  (tachycardia) can be classified as a pharmacological effect, without coffee therefore being a drug. A therapeutic effect is neither claimed nor given for CBD oils. In the case of Epidyolex®, the effective dose is given as 10-20mg CBD per kilogram body weight per day (Epidyolex SmPC, EMA). For a CBD oil with maximum of 10% CBD (approx. 100 mg/g) this amount would be approx. 0.1-0.2 ml CBD oil/kg body weight, at 60kg body weight this would correspond to taking an unrealistic amount of 6-12ml CBD oil per day to achieve an effect corresponding to Epidyolex; for CBD oils with a lower concentration correspondingly more. The commercial containers usually contain little more than 10ml. This would also contradict the intended use or the explicit consumption recommendation of the manufacturers. Therefore, the claim is unrealistic to be able to achieve a therapeutic purpose with the CBD oil, as is the idea of being able to "attach" the status of a drug to extracts with the help of such a comparison with Epidyolex®.
Moreover, according to the rules of pharmacology, principally it is not possible to infer the same or different effects at much lower dosages from effects at therapeutic dosages. For the two CBD oil formulations in question at the Cologne court a daily intake of maximum between 18 mg and 45 mg of CBD is recommended (related to 60 kg body weight this is between 0.3 mg/kg bw and 0.75 mg/kg bw): 
In absolute CBD quantities, the safety margin between pharmaceutical/therapeutic dosage and food supplement ranges from 13 (= 10/0.75) to 67 (= 20/0.3). Thus, for the therapeutic effect of Epidyolex, at least 13 times if not 67 times the amount of CBD is needed, and only together with another antiepileptic drug, clobazam.

Such a safety margin between a drug dose and the intake level of a food or dietary supplement ingredient corresponds to the very generous safety margins used in deriving safe reference doses for that substance (e.g.  an ADI, i.e., an Acceptable Daily Intake, or a TDI, i.e., a Tolerable Daily Intake) in risk assessments of substances, e.g., the factor of at least 30 derived from a LOAEL for the Acute Reference Dose of THC. However, significantly lower safety margins have been established by the authorities for other substances. For example, the BfR has specified a safety margin of 4.3 between the therapeutically effective minimum dose and the reference dose for morphine (10 µg/kg bw, used as an anaesthetic and analgesic medicine), which is also found in poppy seeds and thus in foodstuffs, while the EFSA has only specified a factor of 3 for extrapolation from the lowest-observed-effect-level (LOEL) to a no-observed-effect level (NOEL).
If the argumentation of the Cologne Administrative Court is upheld, poppy seeds would also have to be classified as medicine and banned as food.

In the preliminary ruling Hecht-Pharma, the European Court of Justice explicitly named the dosage of a product as a criterion for the classification of a functional medicinal product.
Finally, in the case Commission v. Spain, the European Court of Justice ruled that the mere fact that a product contains a medicinal plant does not allow the conclusion that this product is a functional medicinal product. This is because it is possible that, due to the small amount of active ingredients, it has no or too little effect on physiological functions to be a functional medicine.
Furthermore, it is settled case law of the European Court of Justice that the measures chosen by the Member States must be proportionate to the objective pursued and must be in accordance with proportionality. The granting of a marketing authorization for a functional medicinal product is subject to strict requirements, and the obligation to obtain such authorization before marketing a product in question in the territory of the Member State concerned is consistent with the principle of proportionality only if it is actually necessary to protect public health. Such a restriction (as by Spain) on the free movement of goods must therefore necessarily be based on a detailed examination of the risk which the Member State claims to present. The measures chosen by the Member States must be limited to what is actually necessary to protect public health or to meet the imperative requirements of consumer protection. In order not to restrict trade unnecessarily, the measures must be proportionate to the objective pursued.
Codified law
According to Article 116 of the European Medicines Directive (Directive 2001/83/EC), the competent authorities of the Member States must also suspend or revoke the marketing authorization procedure for a medicinal product if it becomes apparent that the product lacks therapeutic efficacy. According to this provision, therapeutic efficacy is lacking if it is established that therapeutic results cannot be achieved with the drug.
The European Medicines Directive on medicinal products for human use further states that a pharmacodynamic effect in humans alone is not sufficient to draw conclusions regarding a possible therapeutic effect.
As well, the European Medicines Directive on veterinary medicinal products states under Pre-Clinical and Clinical Testing that a pharmacodynamic effect in animals alone is not sufficient to draw conclusions regarding a possible therapeutic effect.
BfArM's argumentation is based on a "linear-no-threshold" hypothesis of the therapeutic effect, since according to this view there is also no lower value of the pharmacological effect (which was to be proven) .However, therapeutic and pharmacological effects are not the same, since a therapeutic effect is achieved only above a certain threshold dose. Also, it is erroneously assumed here that only CBD was the effective agent ("pars pro toto"). In fact, pure CBD (Epidyolex, >98% pure CBD) and CBD oils (hemp extracts with up to 10% CBD) are completely different in that the latter contain other phytosubstances such as other cannabinoids, terpenes, phytophenols and other pharmacologically or physiologically active compounds widely distributed in nature. It is downright grotesque to completely exclude these different compositions from the considerations and instead reduce them to the few percentages of CBD.
The Borderline Guideline, MEDDEV 2.1/3, rev.3, referred to by the Cologne Administrative Court also points out that the property as a medicinal product must be determined in each individual case in accordance with the established case law of the European Court of Justice.
Absorption of CBD through food
In the “garlic” decision, the ECJ further held that a garlic preparation whose effects on physiological functions do not exceed the effects that a food distorted in an appropriate quantity may have on those functions cannot be classified as a functional medicinal product.
First of all, the opinion of the Administrative Court of Cologne is wrong, which even wants to deny the food property to hemp extracts and "CBD", since a basic nutrient function of CBD was neither known nor currently recognizable, and CBD oils or other foods with enriched CBD did not fulfil any of the basic functions of a food.
The term "foodstuff" is defined according to Art. 2 of the European Foodstuffs Directive (EC) No.178/2002. Foodstuffs are	any substance or product, whether processed, partially processed or unprocessed, intended to be, or reasonably expected to be ingested by humans.
In principle, substances or products mean any kind of consumable or usable substance. They do not require a nutritional or enjoyment value, nor do they have to serve a specific nutritional or technological purpose.

This definition differs in two respects from previously applicable national definitions (such as in Germany), which excluded substances that are predominantly intended to be consumed for purposes other than nutrition or pleasure. Foods now include not only substances that are objectively intended to be consumed, but also those that "may reasonably be expected to be consumed." Thus, the previous characteristics are extended to such substances that are objectively not primarily intended for consumption. In addition, when determining the characteristics of a food, it is no longer important that they be suitable for nutrition or consumption. An example would be dietary fibre, which is known to have no nutritional or enjoyment value.

Therefore, CBD in the sense of European food law is an "other substance with a nutritional or physiological effect" as defined in Art. 2 of the Supplement Directive, or in the same sense an "other substance" as defined in Art. 2.2. of the Regulation "on the addition of vitamins and minerals and of certain other substances to foods".

Hemp extracts have a similar function in foodstuffs as other plant extracts, for example hop extracts, which are used in beers and lemonades, for example for flavouring and preservation. Nutritional or other physiological functions (e.g., antioxidant properties) are basically irrelevant, as mentioned above. Botanical proximity to pharmaceutical formulations also plays no role. Plants such as hops, chamomile, coffee, tea, etc. do contain pharmacologically active substances, yet they are primarily used as foodstuffs. Consequently, an isolate such as CBD is to be treated similarly to bisabolol, the active ingredient in chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla), which is primarily used in cosmetics, to caffeine, the stimulating active ingredient in coffee (Coffea spp.) and to tea (Camellia sinensis), or curcumin, the active ingredient in the rhizome of turmeric (Curcuma longa), which is primarily used in food, but also in pharmaceuticals-..

CBD can also certainly be absorbed through the normal diet. This also applies to hempseed oil and hemp tea. CBD and its precursor cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) are the most important cannabinoids in commercial hemp, which was probably influenced by the targeted reduction by breeding of the psychoactive Δ9-tetra-hydrocannabinol (THC) and its acid precursor THCA. It is known that CBD has similar physicochemical properties to THC and that THC is already present in foods such as hemp seeds, hemp seed oil, and hemp leaf tea, although often in the ppm range only. Due to the higher concentration of CBD/CBDA compared to THC/THCA in industrial hemp (about 25-fold according to experiments by Knezevic et al. (2021) ), it must be assumed that natural CBD exposure via food is substantially higher than that of THC.
The classification of a product as a drug must therefore be made separately in each individual case. The therapeutic efficacy must be scientifically established. The dosage of the active ingredients of a product is the most important criterion for distinguishing medicinal products from foodstuffs.
The case of doubt provision of the Art. 2, 2. of the European Medicines Directive 2001/83/EC, is also irrelevant in the present case. This is because, according to the ECJ case law, this rule on cases of doubt only applies if the product in question fulfils the requirements of a medicinal product, which it obviously doesn’t. The question of whether a pharmacological effect is present must not be left open by applying the rule on cases of doubt.
Distribution of the burden of proof
According to the ECJ and the previously cited Borderline Directive, the decision as to whether a product is a medicinal product or not must be made in each individual case. All characteristics of the product must be taken into account, in particular its pharmacological properties. These properties must demonstrably and appreciably correct or influence physiological functions by a pharmacological action. If there is only a mere suspicion that a product has a pharmacological effect, it cannot be classified as a medicinal product.
The Cologne Administrative Court makes a different assessment of the burden of proof. According to this, it is up to the entrepreneur to fully and comprehensibly demonstrate the properties of the product he has placed on the market. Only in exceptional cases will it be possible for the authorities to positively determine the qualification of a product as a functional drug without the cooperation of the entrepreneur. The entrepreneur is in control of his product in all its properties, especially in its composition and mode of action, so that it is up to him to eliminate any remaining ambiguities by submitting appropriate data material.
In case of the CBD oils in question, the Administrative Court, together with the BfArM, merely presumes that a medicinal product is at hand here.
According to the principles of the ECJ case law and the German Federal Administrative Court, the reference to approved comparative preparations and the express statement that the preparation is dosed below the threshold of therapeutic success should not be sufficient, to assume a functional medicinal product with appreciable pharmacological effects. Such an assumption would have far-reaching consequences for the marketability of the corresponding product category in Germany with regard to the entire free movement of goods in the EU. No appreciable influence on physiological functions has been scientifically and plausibly demonstrated, nor has been taken into account the principle of proportionality, or the risks to public health been dealt with in detail.
Admittedly, it may be a considerable challenge for the authority to scientifically and plausibly determine the appreciable pharmacological effect in each individual case. And it may be easier to merely refer to the existence of pharmacological effects in the case of an existing reference preparation, without scientifically clearly determining the specific dosage for therapeutic success and thus for the qualification as a medicine. In order to meet all the legal requirements mentioned, however, it must also be possible to prove appreciable efficacy in the specific dosage that goes beyond any pharmacological effect, no matter how small. Because at the latest with a therapeutic effect the border to the significant influence is crossed. Otherwise, many foodstuffs legally available on the market (such as coffee, cinnamon and sage, etc.) would also have to be classified as medicinal products and withdrawn from the market as an undesirable consequence. Scientific delimitation criteria for a harmless daily dose on a toxicological basis already exist for this purpose.
Result
The per-se conclusion (“conclusion from priority”) drawn by the BfArM and the Administrative Court of Cologne and the blanket classification of a CBD oil with hemp extract as a medicinal product thus contradicts the established case law of the European Court of Justice as well as the European Medicinal Products Directive. It is not sufficient that any pharmacological effect is present at all, but it must be significant and also be able to lead to a therapeutic success.
If German authorities continued to refer to the decision of the BfArM and the Cologne Administrative Court for comparable products, this would not be in line with national and European law. The result of a corresponding request for a preliminary ruling at the ECJ would be foreseeable. The same applies in the European context for the competent authorities in the EU member states.
The Administrative Court of Cologne also failed to conduct a proportionality test to assess the decision of the BfArM. The decision to classify a product as a medicinal product and thus to trigger restrictions on the free movement of goods within the Union requires a detailed examination by the authority of the public health risk on which the decision is based.
CBD can also be ingested in quite significant quantities through the daily diet, so that for this reason alone there is no need and no justification to classify CBD oils with low CBD content as medicinal products.
The consumer risks that could be associated with the consumption of low-dose CBD oils are currently being examined in the Novel Food application procedures by the EFSA. Any further measures, such as a general classification as a medicinal product, contradict the principle of proportionality and impair the European free movement of goods.
According to all this, CBD oils with low dosages are not functional medicinal products, but foodstuffs and, if the food law requirements are met, in particular approval as a novel food, they can also be marketed as food supplements.
V. Designation as a cosmetic
Recently, hemp extracts have been increasingly marketed as cosmetics, mostly with the designation "cosmetic oral care oil" or "cosmetic oral care spray". The legal assessment of this labelling is controversial.
Cosmetic suitability
On the one hand, the product must be explicitly labelled as a cosmetic. In addition, there should be a recommendation on how to use the product in the oral cavity, e.g., rinse in the oral cavity for 20-30 seconds, and then spit out. Absorption through the gastrointestinal tract should be excluded via the application instructions in order to ensure the differentiation from food.
In particular, the cosmetic study by Vasudevan and Stahl confirms that oral care products with cannabinoids exert an antibacterial effect, and thus clearly fulfil a cosmetic function for the care of the oral cavity. In this study, microorganisms were taken directly from the mouth of 72 subjects and so-called inhibition zone tests were performed in the main experiment. It was found that there was a comparable antimicrobial effect of the 1% cannabinoid-containing mouth rinse compared to the 0.2% chlorhexidine mouth rinse, and cannabinoid-containing mouth rinses sometimes even had a better effect than the classic mouth rinses. In addition, the use of chlorhexidine leads to discoloured teeth in the long term and promotes the accumulation of calcium, which leads to the formation of dental calculus.

The antibacterial mechanism of action of cannabinoids is not yet fully understood. However, it is assumed that their mode of action is related to the change in membrane permeability as well as the change in cellular communication through the inhibition of membrane vesicles released by bacteria. In addition, cannabinoids also show a synergistic interaction that enhances the antibacterial effect of broad-spectrum antibiotics in vitro .

CBD therefore appears to have benefits in fighting plaque, is highly protective against bacteria in the mouth, and may even be helpful in removing bacteria from plaque during tooth polishing.

The claim as a cosmetic product is thus generally substantiated and justified by cosmetic studies.

Legal classification
a) Demarcation of cosmetic product vs. food
A landmark decision in this context is the ruling of the Administrative Court of Hamburg dated March 16, 2022. The Administrative Court of Hamburg restored the suspensive effect of the objection filed against an administrative ban on sale for a cosmetic oral care oil on the following grounds based on European primary law.
On the one hand, the court granted the product the property of a cosmetic, contrary to the opinion of the authority. This is because any absorption via the oral mucosa is not sufficient for the required constituent element of "ingestion" within the meaning of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002, the European Food Regulation. The court states in its decision on page 10 as follows:
"Based on this definition, the oral oils at issue are not foodstuffs, even if it is assumed that they are absorbed via the oral mucosa when used as intended. Contrary to the view of the defendant, the term "ingestion" within the meaning of Article 2 (1) of Regulation (EC) No. 178/2002 does not include any absorption via the oral mucosa (see also Higher Administrative Court [OVG] Lüneburg, decision of February 9, 2021, 13 ME 580/20, juris, recital no. 24; Administrative Court [VG] Augsburg, decision of June 19, 2020, Au 9 S 20.847, juris, recital no. 40). Ingestion in the aforementioned sense rather requires that the substances or products in question enter the human body via the gastrointestinal tract when used as intended or expected (at least also and not merely to a marginal extent) (cf. on this and the following: Higher Administrative Court [OVG] Hamburg, decision dated 19.08.2021, 5 Bs 56/21, juris Ls. 1, recital no. 20 ff.). This understanding results on the one hand from the legislative history of Article 2 (1) of Regulation (EC) No. 178/2002.
Furthermore, according to the Green Paper of the EU Commission of April 30, 1997 ("General Principles of Food Law in the European Union", published at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-con-tent/DE/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:51997DC0176&from=EN), which was a basis of Regulation (EC) No. 178/2002 and which, among other things aimed at defining the concept of "food" at Community level (op. cit. p. viii and p. 28), the term "human intake" was chosen to cover all products that pass through the gastrointestinal tract, including all substances ingested by mouth or nose or administered by gastric intubation. In contrast, products introduced directly into the bloodstream by parenteral route should not be covered by this definition (op. cit. p. 28).
This makes it clear that the Commission associated the concept of ingestion with the notion that food substances should in any case pass through the gastrointestinal tract, while the manner in which the substances are delivered to the interior of the body (e.g., through the mouth or nose) is irrelevant."
The contradictory view of the administrative courts cited by the Administrative Court of Hamburg, which is also regularly taken up by various expert opinions of the authorities, assumes that all substances absorbed into the body through mouth or nose necessarily enter - at least in part - the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, all substances that are absorbed by people through the mouth or nose were covered by the food definition.
This interpretation is inadequate in literal, historical and systematic interpretation, as shown in detail by the Administrative Court Hamburg in the cited decision. Ingestion via the oral mucosa is precisely not sufficient to be considered ingestion within the meaning of the European Food Regulation.
b) Borderline Manual
In the manual of the Cosmetic Products Working Group (subgroup "Borderline Products") on the scope of application of the European Cosmetics Regulation, various delimitations of cosmetic products from other product categories are made. The handbook is not an official document of the Commission but is intended to serve as a working aid in individual case decisions on the applicability of EU law. Accordingly, cosmetic products are delimited, among others, as follows:

‘3.3.30. Mouthwashes and dental gels
203. Question: Is a mouthwash or a dental gel (other than regular toothpaste) a cosmetic product?

204 Answer: Mouthwashes and dental gels may be considered as cosmetic products provided that they are intended to be placed in contact with the teeth and the mucous membranes of the oral cavity and the purpose of their use is "exclusively or mainly cleaning them, perfuming them, changing their appearance, protecting them, keeping them in good condition or correcting body odours".
205. Mouthwashes and dental gels with secondary "antimicrobial" claims may be considered as cosmetic products provided that the main purpose of use is that of a cosmetic product.
206. A product which is presented or intended for the treatment or prevention of infections, inflammation or other oral cavity diseases should not be considered as a cosmetic product.
207. In any case, a decision on the qualification of the products has to be made by the national competent authorities, on a case-by-case basis, and taking into account all the characteristics of the product, such as the presentation of the products, the ingredients, and the mode of action and instructions of use.’

According to this, the authorities of the Member States must assess all the properties of the product within the framework of a case-by-case decision, in particular the manner of presentation, i.e., how the product is designated and how the product is recommended for use. The Commission's working group on cosmetic products thus also clearly states that it is the presentation as a cosmetic product that is important and that this type of product advertised by the manufacturer must be taken into account, provided that it is actually suitable for fulfilling cosmetic functions.
c) Market expectation as a cosmetic agent
In the decision (loc. cit.), the Administrative Court of Hamburg also explicitly addresses the argument of many authorities that a market expectation for CBD oils has meanwhile developed, according to which an intake via the gastrointestinal tract is to be expected exclusively. The Administrative Court of Hamburg states on page 12 as follows:
"(2) Based on the aforementioned interpretation of the term food, the oral oils at issue are not substances which are intended to be, or which can reasonably be expected to be ingested by humans in the aforementioned sense. When considering the objective purpose, labelling, presentation and marketing of the oils as a whole, they do not - or if they do, then only to a marginal extent - enter the body of the consumer via the gastrointestinal tract when used as intended or expected. The oral oils are unambiguously advertised as cosmetic products for use in the oral cavity, so that attentive and reasonable average consumers (see Federal Administrative Court [BVerwG], decision of 20.06.2012, 3 B 87/11, juris recital no. 4) are also likely to receive the impression that the products are intended exclusively for use in the oral cavity."
In the cited ruling, the Federal Administrative Court (BVerwG) states that the view of an average consumer who is reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect must be taken into account. The decision of the Federal Administrative Court of October 18, 2000 (file number: 1 B 45.00) is also based on how an average consumer is likely to perceive the statement in question. This indeterminate legal concept is based on the established case law of the European Court of Justice, as for example in Case C-303/97. In this case, the ECJ expressly referred in a trademark case to how an "average consumer who is reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect is likely to perceive a statement".
If the view of the average consumer is decisive, all those who are unlikely to be considered as consumers are excluded as reference persons. Therefore, the view of the consumer addressed is deemed decisive by the court. The court of facts must determine which reference consumer is decisive in the individual case, whereby the question of who is likely to purchase a particular product is not a question of law (Federal Administrative Court, loc.cit., para. 4).
The Administrative Court of Hamburg then goes on to state:
"It does not follow otherwise from the fact that CBD oils were previously marketed by the applicant as food supplements and aroma oils. Due to the new purpose, labelling, presentation and marketing of the products, it cannot be assumed that average consumers will disregard the clear user instructions due to an association with the former products. According to these, the oral cavity should be "rinsed" with two to three drops of the oil for 30 seconds and the product then spat out. Whether rinsing and wetting of the entire oral cavity is practically possible due to the small amount of product indicated is irrelevant, since in any case a supply to the gastrointestinal tract is neither intended nor to be expected in the case of intended use. It is expressly pointed out that unnecessary swallowing should be avoided. It can therefore be assumed that consumers will adhere to this and spit out the product together with the saliva accumulated during application. The fact that the 30-second application may result in ingestion of ingredients of the oil through the oral mucosa is also irrelevant under the aforementioned interpretation of ingestion."
According to the previously mentioned case law of the European Court of Justice and the Federal Administrative Court of Germany, it is not the general perception of the market that is important, but rather the view and understanding of the average consumer addressed. With a clearly advertised function as a cosmetic oral care spray or oil, consumers who expect other than cosmetic effects from CBD oils are therefore not addressed. Of the average consumers who purchase the product as a cosmetic care product, it is correct to assume with the Administrative Court of Hamburg that these consumers will not disregard the instructions for use.
If it then turns out that the product is a cosmetic product, a classification as food is excluded according to Art. 2 (1) of Regulation (EC) No. 178/2022, and thus also the application of the Novel Food Regulation VO (EU) 2015/2283.
Combined with proper labelling, a hemp extract oil with cannabinoids is thus marketable as a cosmetic.
VI. Outlook
In the meantime, a first second-instance decision by the Administrative Court of Munich from February 2023 has become known, which confirms the decision of the BfArM and the VG Cologne, but without further gain of arguments. This decision, even if issued only provisionally in summary proceedings, emphasizes the explosive nature of this issue for the CBD market. Similar decisions from other EU countries have not yet become known.
Several applicants have submitted applications for various CBD products and ingredients to the European Commission for authorisation as novel foods, such as the EIHA with its Novel Food Consortium. The EIHA represents more than 150 companies in this procedure and invests an amount of up to € 3,5 million in toxicological studies for 4 different categories. It is problematic in this respect that the medical character of a product continues to be defined at national level, and the European Commission has no authority to rule on this definition. As recital 18 of the Novel Food Regulation explicitly states, the Member State is entitled to restrict the marketing of a product that is a medicinal product in accordance with EU law.
In this respect, it would be desirable for the European member states to inform each other and, if necessary, even to introduce an obligation to notify products that are to be classified as medicinal products if they can be traded as foodstuffs in other member states. For example, within the framework of Regulation (EU) 2019/515, such cooperation between the Member States is already possible and, in the sense of a common, European market is also urgently recommended.

Appendix 1:
On the pharmacological and therapeutic effects of CBD in humans
In 1979, the state of knowledge was still: from summary studies on toxicity and tolerability of CBD, it emerged that CBD only showed any observable / measurable effects at all from an oral dose of approx. 160 mg/d.
In the meantime, a great many clinical studies, and observational studies on the pharmacological and presumed potential therapeutic effect of CBD at low doses have been added. Only the most recent review articles from the scientific literature with the individual studies cited therein are listed here.
Millar and co-workers (2019) concluded from a meta-analysis of 35 studies with a CBD dosage range of <1 to 50 mg/kg/d: "There was no signal of positive activity of CBD in small randomized controlled trials (range n = 6-62) assessing diabetes, Crohn's disease, ocular hypertension, fatty liver disease or chronic pain. However, low doses (average 2.4 mg/kg/d) were used in these studies. ... Pharmacokinetic studies as well as conclusive phase III trials to elucidate effective plasma concentrations within medical contexts are severely lacking and highly encouraged." The average dose of 2.4 mg/kg/d studied here corresponds to a daily dose of 144 mg CBD at 60 kg body weight. If individual studies with even lower doses are taken into account, no proven therapeutic effect (for whatever indication) can be demonstrated for doses below 100 mg CBD per day.
A study by the Australian Health Authority (2020) on potential therapeutic effects and safety profile of low dose CBD concluded: "There was a paucity of high-quality published trials (meta-analyses and RCTs) with the majority of the literature for analysis being lower quality exploratory studies or case series with no placebo control. Thus, no clear conclusions can be drawn on efficacy of CBD at low doses as larger phase III and conclusive efficacy trials have not been conducted."
A completely new overview is given by Arnold and colleagues (2023) on the most recent studies on safety and efficacy of low-dose CBD. Even with the state of knowledge as of September 2022, they conclude, "Therapeutic benefits of CBD became more clearly evident at doses greater than or equal to 300 mg. ..... At doses of 300- 400 mg, there is evidence of efficacy with respect to reduced anxiety, as well as anti-addiction effects in drug-dependent individuals. More marginal and less consistent therapeutic effects on insomnia, neurological disorders, and chronic pain were also apparent. Larger, more robust clinical trials are needed to confirm the therapeutic potential of lower (i.e., <300 mg/day) oral doses of CBD."
Thus, therapeutic efficacy for the previously suspected indications of insomnia, neurological disorders, or chronic pain, could not be demonstrated or medically confirmed (as evidence-based) for CBD doses below 300 mg/d.

Annex 2
CBD as a food ingredient: occurrence in foods
CBD has always been present as the most abundant cannabinoid in commercial hemp, particularly in the inflorescences and fruit clusters and in the leaves, but also on the hull of the hemp seeds, and thus also in hemp seed products, such as hemp seed oil. 
In a field sample of commercial hemp, which is carried out to control the THC content (according to EU legislation), CBD can generally be detected in a 
quantity ratio of 15 to 30 to THC. Measured CBD contents in the plant are between 1% and max. 5%, but usually below 3%    . In hemp leaves, depending on the growing season, up to 3% total CBD (sum of CBD + CBDA, normalized to CBD) can be detected .
Lalge et al. examined foods with different proportions of hemp seed products and found CBD contents up to 0.34%. If one consumes e.g. 30 of such a product, one takes in approx. 100 mg CBD, which even corresponds to more than twice the daily intake when consuming the higher-percentage hemp extract in question (45 mg). This shows that the daily CBD intake from hemp extracts with natural CBD contents does not necessarily have to exceed the CBD intake with common (and marketable) hemp foods.
Citti et al. (2018) investigated the levels of CBD and THC (and their natural precursors CBDA and THCA) in 13 different commercial hemp seed oils from commercial hemp varieties. CBD levels ranging from "undetectable" to 1056 ppm (mg/kg) were found; CBDA levels ranged from "undetectable" to 821 ppm. On average, between 50 and 100 ppm CBD can be detected in hemp seed oil.
Izzo et al. also investigated the CBDA content in 13 commercial hemp seed oils in Italy from EU-approved commercial hemp varieties. They found CBDA levels ranging from 0.28 to 3.8 mg/g (280-3800 ppm). When evaluating this, it must be taken into account that CBDA transforms into CBD when the oil is stored and heated (see also Citti et al., loc. cit.). Thus, when consumed, CBD is also absorbed in addition to CBDA, and in the case of 2 tablespoons of hemp oil (approx. 27 g) approx. 50 mg CBD, when 50% of the CBDA has already been converted into CBD.
For the evidence of hemp extract or hemp flower (petals) as a traditional food, thefollowing references can be cited:
The company Dupetit writes on its website , that since 1994, in addition to the production of hemp oil, the company is also dedicated to the production of hemp extracts for use in food:

Over 20 years of experience in the manufacturing of high-quality extracts from hemp as raw material are warranty for our valuable products. Canna®Hemp Extract is a 100% solvent free extract without any chemical additives. The carbon dioxide extract is distilled under mild conditions, and is high in CBD and CBDA content. The product was examined and certified by a renowned German analytic laboratory. Made from carefully selected raw materials, the product contains CBD together with its natural precursor CBDA, both having no inebriant effects at all This extract is manufactured without any addition of synthetic chemicals or preservatives.
Freshness and a high content of CBDA (cannabidiolic acid) as well as of terpenes and phenols make our Canna®Extract ( ….) a unique product. The hemp flavouring may also be used as an antioxidant in food and cosmetics.”

So, Dupetit explicitly states in the chapter "History": "Since 1994 hemp products are produced and distributed in our company. ... From the beginning we dedicated ourselves to the production of high-quality hemp oil and hemp extract for use in food...."
And:
"The extract is produced by us exclusively as a flavouring..."

Dupetit's data allow the following conclusions about the hemp extract:
1) it is a flavouring extract. From today's point of view - i.e., for the time after the EU Flavourings Regulation 1334/2008 came into force on 20.01.2011 - Dupetit has been producing flavouring extracts (flavouring preparations) from hemp in the sense of the definition of this regulation since 1994.
2) from the information on the hemp extracts offered today, it is clear that it is either a primary extract (not heat treated), because it still contains CBDA, or an extract only partially decarboxylated. 
Because freshness and content of terpenes and phenols are advertised, it can be assumed that the primary extract is not decarboxylated. If it is decarboxylated, the volatile terpenes are either kept in the boiler (process under inherent pressure) or added to the decarboxylate after distillation.
3) Since the hemp extract was already produced and distributed for use in food approx. 3 years before the deadline of May 15, 1997 of the Novel Food VO, a significant consumption can be assumed. Thus, this hemp extract is a traditional food.
B) 	Cannabia® hemp beer has been brewed by Dupetit since 1996, using hemp tips (processed in a "gentle process") for flavouring:
“Cannabía® 
 first hemp beverage (Cannabis beer) of mankind
was born in March 1996 , when Germany officially authorized the cultivation of hemp, the so called "fibre hemp".
A secret combination of by hand selected and harvested organic : barley malt, hops and hemp, give as result the unmistakable hemp aroma of Cannabía®.
 dupetit Natural Products was already working with and on hemp aroma for its food, sweets and perfume as well as the organic cosmetic line... and we like beer ...
Together with dupetit Natural Products he carefully crafted the idea into the finished recipe by adding to our organic German hemp this experience and knowledge, as well his organic malt, hops and yeast giving Cannabía® its unique taste.”
The following can be read about hemp beer in the hemp magazine :

So, these "hemp beers" and the cannabis tips used are traditional foods. However, the hemp beers do not talk about extracts.
Lachenmeier writes on hemp flowers and hemp beer:
“Hemp Beer
In work by Hupf et al. (1997) the organoleptical value, and therefore the character of dried hemp inflorescence, watery infusions, and beer extracts (called hemp beer) as food products were examined. After the organoleptical tests, the authors came to the conclusion that none of the products provided a significant consumption value. Official food control first classified hemp inflorescences as additives (BgVV, 1997) (e.g., taste enhancing substance), but this opinion was not affirmed because it was determined that they have prevailing attributes as food. Such products also do not fall into the requirements of regulation No 258/97 (EC) regarding novel food products and ingredients (Taschan, 1999).”
Discussion: Hereby the food property is granted to the hemp inflorescences; however, there is no mention of extracts either.
D) In the Novel Food Catalogue of the EU it was documented under the entry "Cannabis sativa" that hemp leaves are (traditionally) added to soups in Southeast Asia:

Thus, it is hereby shown that, in addition to the commonly used hemp seeds, hemp flowers and hemp leaves of industrial hemp are also traditional foods and are used as such.
There is a traditional cooking recipe from Lithuania called šnitka :
"The dish called šnitka was prepared in the lands of the north-eastern GDL. The dish is made from hemp leaves and is used to improve overall well-being" (English translation from the original).

In the meantime, this entry has been changed and is now :

The old entry in the Novel Food Catalogue of the EU has at least mentioned that besides the commonly used hemp seeds also hemp leaves are traditional food and are used as such. However, there are still restrictions to this: the old NFVO 258/97 is ".... not applicable to most foods and food ingredients of this plant" (regarding the consumption of hemp and hemp products). So, there is no carte blanche issued for all foods made from hemp.
The reference to specific national legislation on marketing in EU member states indicates the non-harmonized status of plant extracts (see Chapter 3).

e) The EU Novel Food Catalogue states the following about cannabidiol:

This entry is about extracts for the first time, and specifically about a CBD-enriched hemp extract, whatever "enriched" means here.
The EU does not make any statement about a natural hemp extract.

The following conclusions can be drawn from the information in the EU Novel Food database:
The raw, not further treated and not heated hemp extract (mainly containing CBDA) could still be classified as traditional food, however, further restrictions by national legislation on the allowed plant parts for plant extracts have to be considered.
The hemp extract decarboxylated in the manufacturing process, which contains CBD as the main component of the cannabinoids, would then be classified as Novel Food in the sense of 258/97/EC Art.1, No. 2 (f). This is especially so because the decarboxylation of CBDA to form CBD amounts to nothing more than enrichment of the crude extract with CBD, thus increasing the concentration of CBD in the final product.
 On the other hand, an enriched extract could also be formed by adding pure CBD to a crude extract, after which CBD would then be present in the product alongside CBDA and THCA/THC. Such a product would also be classified as novel food.

The findings suggest that a CBD-containing hemp extract that still contains CBDA is recognized as a traditional food or flavouring extract based on Dupetit's claims.
A fully decarboxylated extract that has a significantly higher CBD content and CBDA/CBD ratio than occurs naturally in the plant would have to be registered as a Novel Food (at least there is no evidence that a fully decarboxylated extract has been consumed as a food in significant quantities before May 15, 1997).
This assessment is also in line with the findings in the legal opinion Novel Food by Forstmann and Büttner .