---
title: "1-s2.0-S0376871603002849-main"
source: "1-s2.0-S0376871603002849-main.pdf"
converted: "2026-01-25"
pages: 11
---

Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
Review
# Dose related risk of motor vehicle crashes after cannabis use
J.G. Ramaekers a,∗, G. Berghaus b, M. van Laar c, O.H. Drummer d
a Experimental Psychopharmacology Unit, Department of Neurocognition, Faculty of Psychology, Maastricht University,
P.O. Box 616, MD 6200 Maastricht, The Netherlands
b Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
c Trimbos Institute, Netherlands Focal Point, Utrecht, The Netherlands
d Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine, Monash University, Southbank, Australia
Received 6 May 2003; accepted 17 October 2003
Abstract
Theroleof9-tetrahydrocannabinol(THC)indriverimpairmentandmotorvehiclecrasheshastraditionallybeenestablishedinexperimental
and epidemiological studies. Experimental studies have repeatedly shown that THC impairs cognition, psychomotor function and actual driving
performance in a dose related manner. The degree of performance impairment observed in experimental studies after doses up to 300 g/kg
THC were equivalent to the impairing effect of an alcohol dose producing a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) ≥0.05 g/dl, the legal limit for
driving under the inﬂuence in most European countries. Higher doses of THC, i.e. >300 g/kg THC have not been systematically studied but
can be predicted to produce even larger impairment. Detrimental effects of THC were more prominent in certain driving tasks than others.
Highly automated behaviors, such as road tracking control, were more affected by THC as compared to more complex driving tasks requiring
conscious control. Epidemiological ﬁndings on the role of THC in vehicle crashes have sometimes contrasted ﬁndings from experimental
research. Case-control studies generally conﬁrmed experimental data, but culpability surveys showed little evidence that crashed drivers who
only used cannabis are more likely to cause accidents than drug free drivers. However, most culpability surveys have established cannabis
use among crashed drivers by determining the presence of an inactive metabolite of THC in blood or urine that can be detected for days after
smoking and can only be taken as evidence for past use of cannabis. Surveys that established recent use of cannabis by directly measuring
THC in blood showed that THC positives, particularly at higher doses, are about three to seven times more likely to be responsible for their
crash as compared to drivers that had not used drugs or alcohol. Together these epidemiological data suggests that recent use of cannabis may
increase crash risk, whereas past use of cannabis does not. Experimental and epidemiological research provided similar ﬁndings concerning
the combined use of THC and alcohol in trafﬁc. Combined use of THC and alcohol produced severe impairment of cognitive, psychomotor,
and actual driving performance in experimental studies and sharply increased the crash risk in epidemiological analyses.
© 2003 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Cannabis; Driving; Crash risk; Experimental; Epidemiology
1. Introduction
The effects of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) on the
ability of drivers to operate safely have traditionally been
determined in epidemiological surveys of THC users’ in-
volvement in trafﬁc accidents and in experimental studies
to measure the drug’s inﬂuence on skills related to driv-
ing (reviews: Robbe, 1994; Berghaus et al., 1998a,b; Bates
and Blakely, 1999; Solowij, 1998; EMCDDA, 1999; O’Kane
et al., 2002). The purpose of epidemiological studies is to
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +31-43-38-81-951;
fax: +31-43-38-84-125.
E-mail address: j.ramaekers@psychology.unimaas.nl (J.G. Ramaekers).
determine both the severity of THC impairment and the
prevalence of THC use among the driving population by
measuring the frequency of cannabis use among drivers who
do and do not become involved in crashes. Essentially they
aim to determine if cannabis use is over represented among
drivers who were involved in accidents. Experimental stud-
ies are designed to predict the effects of cannabis on driving
ability by measuring their users’ performances in laboratory
tests of isolated psychological functions, driving simulators
and on-the-road driving tests. In the context of well-designed
experiments, drugs that produce large performance impair-
ments in many different tests can be considered potentially
hazardous to drivers whereas drugs that fail to produce any
impairment can be considered safe. Experimental studies
0376-8716/$ – see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2003.10.008

110
J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
often provide the earliest evidence for a drug’s hazard po-
tential for driving.
Many excellent studies on the effects of cannabis on driv-
ing are available only as technical reports, proceedings or
book chapters. That is unfortunate since reviews in general
should not cover data that are not published in peer-reviewed
sources. Yet, applying this rule invariably would seriously
weaken any review in this ﬁeld. We therefore decided to
also include sources that did not appear in peer-reviewed
formats, i.e. about 50% of the references, in order to fully
summarize and integrate what is known about the effect of
cannabis on performance and driving ability. In particular a
summary of the literature relevant to the following research
questions will be given:
• Does cannabis impair psychomotor, cognitive, and actual
driving performance and increase the risk of becoming
involved in trafﬁc accidents?
• Is there a relation between performance impairment and
cannabis dose or its concentration in plasma?
• Do combined effects of cannabis and alcohol on driving
performance differ from those of either drug alone?
• Does cannabis affect all aspects of the driving task alike?
2. Epidemiological studies
2.1. Prevalence of THC in crash involved drivers
Surveys conducted in widely separated localities have
generally revealed the presence of THC in between 4 and
14% of drivers who sustained injury or death in trafﬁc acci-
dents (Cimbura et al., 1982; Terhune and Fell, 1982; Terhune
et al., 1992; Chesher and Starmer, 1983; Mason and McBay,
1984; Donelson et al., 1985; Garriott et al., 1986; Daldrup
et al., 1987; McLean et al., 1987; Cimbura et al., 1990;
Soderstrom et al., 1995; Mercer and Jeffery, 1995; Logan
and Schwilke, 1996; Drummer et al., 2003a). Occasionally
higher values have been reported for groups of, predomi-
nantly, young males operating in one or another large Amer-
ican city (Williams et al., 1985; Soderstrom et al., 1988;
Budd et al., 1989). These data however cannot be accepted as
evidence showing that THC was responsible for the crashes,
even though the prevalence of THC in the general driving
populations is assumed to be lower. The reason is that al-
cohol was also found in 50–80% of the same drivers. It is
highly likely that combination of THC and alcohol poses
a bigger risk potential than those of either drug alone. An-
other limitation of these surveys is their lack of an appro-
priate control group. Prevalence studies indicate the extent
to which substances such as THC and alcohol are present
in the blood of (fatally) injured drivers. In the absence of
comparable data from an appropriate control group selected
from the general driving population, results of prevalence
studies can never be taken to indicate the role of THC or
other drugs in causing trafﬁc crashes.
2.2. Culpability studies
Epidemiologists have tried to overcome the lack of norma-
tive data from the general driving population by analyzing
the culpability index of drivers involved in trafﬁc accidents.
Basically, they distinguished between drivers that were re-
sponsible for their crash and those who were not. The former
are taken as the cases and the latter as controls, for determin-
ing the odds ratio for responsibility for trafﬁc accidents under
the inﬂuence of cannabis. Classiﬁcation of culpability should
of course take place without knowledge of the drugs/alcohol
status of drivers in order not to bias the classiﬁcation process.
There have been several culpability studies that investi-
gated the association between cannabis, alcohol, and trafﬁc
crashes. A summary of these studies and their measure of
association is summarized in Table 1. Odd ratios (ORs) and
95% CIs presented in Table 1 are taken from the original
study reports or adapted from Bates and Blakely’s (1999)
re-analyses of these data. It is important to note that in this
type of analysis the crash culpability rates among drivers
positive for THC are compared to crash culpability rates in
drug (including alcohol) free drivers. The odds ratio of drug
free drivers to become involved in a trafﬁc crash is set to
1.0, and serves as the point of reference in order to deter-
mine the statistical signiﬁcance of changes in odds ratios
for drivers under the inﬂuence. If this reference value of
1.0 falls outside the 95% CI associated with odds ratios for
a certain drug, we can safely conclude with 95% certainty
that this drug signiﬁcantly affected crash culpability. How-
ever, if the 95% CI includes the reference mean, the conclu-
sion must be drawn that crash culpability rates of drugged
drivers are comparable to crash culpability rates in drug free
drivers.
All culpability studies have shown that alcohol and the
combination of alcohol with cannabis signiﬁcantly and
strongly elevated crash culpability rates. In most studies
the combined effects of cannabis and alcohol on crash
culpability appeared additive, although a weak suggestion
of a synergistic effect was also apparent in some. Yet,
most culpability studies (Terhune and Fell, 1982; Terhune
et al., 1992; Williams et al., 1985; Drummer, 1994; Hunter
et al., 1998; Lowenstein and Koziol-Mclain, 2001) also
seem to indicate that cannabis alone does not increase
crash culpability. However, these culpability studies have
identiﬁed cannabis use among drivers by solely measur-
ing THC–COOH, an inactive carboxy metabolite of THC
(Williams et al., 1985; Drummer, 1994; Hunter et al., 1998;
Lowenstein and Koziol-Mclain, 2001), or by measuring
either THC or THC–COOH (Terhune and Fell, 1982;
Terhune et al., 1992) in blood or in urine. Following the
use of cannabis, THC–COOH may be present in blood or
urine for days. The presence of THC–COOH thus does not
necessarily imply recent use of cannabis or impairment.
Recent exposure to cannabis can only be safely assumed in
the minority of culpability studies that determined cannabis
use by the presence of THC in the blood.

J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
111
Table 1
Summary of OR of becoming involved in fatal or injurious trafﬁc accidents under the inﬂuence of cannabis, alcohol or their combination as reported in
culpability studies
Substance
Authors
Odds ratio
95% CI
Drug free cases
1.0
Alcohol
Terhune and Fell (1982);
5.4*
2.8–10.5
Williams et al. (1985);
5.0*
2.1–12.2
Terhune et al. (1992);
5.7*
5.1–10.7
Drummer (1994);
5.5*
3.2–9.6
Hunter et al. (1998);
6.8*
4.3–11.1
Lowenstein and Koziol-Mclain (2001);
3.2*
1.1–9.4
Drummer et al. (2003b)
6.0*
4.0–9.1
THC–COOH
Terhune and Fell (1982);
2.1
0.7–6.6
Williams et al. (1985);
0.2
0.2–1.5
Terhune et al. (1992);
0.7
0.2–0.8
Drummer (1994);
0.7
0.4–1.5
Hunter et al. (1998);
0.9
0.6–1.4
Lowenstein and Koziol-Mclain (2001)
1.1
0.5–2.4
THC (range: ng/ml)
<1.0
Hunter et al. (1998)
0.35
0.02–2.1
1.10–2.0
0.51
0.2–1.4
>2
1.74
0.6–5.7
1–100
Drummer et al. (2003a,b)
2.7*
1.02–7.0
5–100
6.6*
1.5–28.0
Alcohol/THC or THC-COOH
Williams et al. (1985);
8.6*
3.1–26.9
Terhune et al. (1992);
8.4*
2.1–72.1
Drummer (1994);
5.3*
1.9–20.3
Hunter et al. (1998);
11.5*
4.6–36.7
Lowenstein and Koziol-Mclain (2001)
3.5*
1.2–11.4
Signiﬁcance of changes in OR is indicated as follows: *<0.05.
Only two culpability studies (Hunter et al., 1998;
Drummer et al., 2003a,b) determined recent cannabis use
by assessing THC in blood. While using identical meth-
ods for establishing culpability of the driver these studies
generally showed that crash culpability for THC positive
cases increased with rising concentrations of THC in blood
(see Table 1). The study by Hunter et al. (also published
in Longo et al., 2000) in 2500 injured drivers failed to es-
tablish a relation between relatively low concentrations of
THC and driver culpability but did ﬁnd that culpable drivers
had a higher mean THC concentration, a difference that
approached statistical signiﬁcance (P = 0.057). Drummer
et al. (2003b) also reported that increments in crash respon-
sibility rates were most prominent at high concentrations
of THC. They conducted a responsibility analysis in 3398
Australian fatally injured drivers recorded in their database
between 1990 and 1999. THC was present in 58 cases in
which no other psychoactive drug or alcohol was found.
The median THC concentration was 10 ng/ml with a range
from 1 to 100 ng/ml. THC positive cases showed an OR
of 2.7 compared to drug free drivers, while taking into
account interactions for age, gender, crash type, jurisdic-
tion, and year of collection. The range of the conﬁdence
interval strongly suggested signiﬁcance of the OR value
as it did not include the reference value 1.0. Analyses on
a subset of cases with THC concentrations of 5 ng/ml or
higher revealed a culpability ratio of 6.6 in THC driver
fatalities as compared to drug free cases. Since alcohol
was a common factor found in cannabis positive cases,
the effect of THC and alcohol combined was also evalu-
ated relative to drivers who were only positive to alcohol
(i.e. BAC > 0.05 g/dl). This analysis revealed a signiﬁ-
cant increment of crash risk (OR 2.9; 95% CI: 1.1–7.7)
suggesting that THC does enhance alcohol-induced im-
pairment, and that this impairment is at least additive to
alcohol.
2.3. Case-control studies
Several epidemiological studies have attempted to include
a representative control group to calculate risk ratio’s for
trafﬁc related hospitalization after THC use. Hingson et al.
(1982) conducted a anonymous random telephone survey of
nearly 6000 16–19 years olds which indicated that frequency
of driving after cannabis use was associated with greater
accident involvement in the year prior to the interview.
Compared to subjects who did not drive after cannabis use,
subjects who drove after smoking marihuana on at least six
occasions per month were 2.4 (95% CI: 1.4–14) times more
likely to be involved in trafﬁc accidents. Those who drove
after marihuana use on at least 15 occasions per month were
2.9 (95% CI: 1.3–6.8) times more likely to have an accident.

112
J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
Mura et al. (2003) conducted a case-control study to
compare the prevalence of THC among injured drivers and
control subjects that were recruited from emergency depart-
ments in six French hospitals. Total study population com-
prised of 900 drivers involved in a non-fatal accident and 900
control drivers who attended the same emergency units for
non-traumatic reasons. Drivers and controls were matched
for sex and age. THC (>1 ng/ml, no other drugs or alcohol
present) was detected in 10% of the injured drivers and in
5% of the controls when averaged over all age groups. In
cases and controls who were younger than 27 years, THC
was detected in 15.3% of the cases and 6.7% of the con-
trols, giving rise to an odds ratio of 2.5 and a 95% CI rang-
ing from 1.5 to 4.2. In cases were both THC and alcohol
(BAC > 0.05 g/dl) were present the OR increased to 4.6
(95% CI: 2.0–10.7).
Gerberich Goodwin et al. (2003) conducted a retrospec-
tive study in a large prepaid Northern Californian health care
program cohort (N = 64, 657) to compare the incidence
of trafﬁc injury related hospitalization among THC users
and non-drug users. All cohort members completed baseline
questionnaires about health behaviors, including cannabis
use between 1979 and 1985. Trafﬁc injury related hospital-
izations were identiﬁed from the date of baseline through
December 1991. An increased risk ratio (OR = 2.3, 95%
CI: 1.44–2.72) for motor vehicle injuries was demonstrated
in male cannabis users relative to non-users.
Data from these studies clearly suggests that cannabis in-
creases a driver’s risk to become involved in a road crash.
Yet, it has been argued that such associations may be con-
founded by life style factors typical for cannabis users.
Fergusson and Horwood (2001) for example established a
statistically signiﬁcant relation between self-reported fre-
quency of cannabis use and self-reported accidents rate (OR
1.6, 95% CI: 1.2–2.0) in a birth cohort of 907 young New
Zealanders (aged 18–21). Adjusting for risky driver behav-
iors and unsafe driver attitudes characteristic for cannabis
users however eliminated the association between cannabis
use and crash risk. The latter analysis suggests that trafﬁc
accident risk among cannabis users is related to their life
style rather than to cannabis use per se. However, these re-
sults may also be taken to support an alternative explana-
tion: i.e. cannabis stimulates risky driving behaviors and/or
attitudes that are linked to accident risk.
Two studies (Dussault et al., 2002; Movig et al., 2003)
have employed a prospective case-control study design that
has historically been the design of choice for epidemiolog-
ical studies of the role of alcohol in motor vehicle crashes
(Borkenstein et al., 1974). Crash risk was evaluated by cal-
culating the odds of an individual in a crash sample testing
positive for cannabis to the odds of an individual testing pos-
itive for cannabis in the exposure sample, that is, in a road-
side survey sample of non-crash-involved drivers using the
same roads in the same time frame. In the study by Movig
et al. (2003), cases (N = 110) were car drivers involved in
road crashes in the Tilburg area of The Netherlands, whereas
controls (N = 816) were recruited at random from the gen-
eral driving population on public roads in the same Tilburg
region between May 2000 and August 2001. Controls were
tested for the presence of cannabis by means of urine sam-
ple screening. If no urine sample could be collected a blood
sample was requested. In total, 79.3% of the control group
was willing to participate in the study. Cases were tested for
cannabis use by means of blood or urine samples taken di-
rectly in the emergency room. Among cases, 13 (12%) tested
positive for cannabis as compared to 49 (6%) among con-
trols. A non-signiﬁcant increase in risk ratio was reported
for cannabis (OR = 1.22, 95% CI: 0.55–2.73) indicating
no association between exposure to cannabis and road acci-
dents. A possible explanation for the latter ﬁnding may be
the lack of statistical power given the relatively low number
of (cannabis) cases and controls that were included in this
survey. The power available for comparison of proportions
depends on the prevalence rates of drugs in the samples un-
der study. If the prevalence rates are low as with most drugs
the sample under study should be relative high. It was one
of the major arguments for the authors’ decision in 2001 to
continue their case-control study for another 3-year-period
in order to multiply the number of cases and controls by
about a factor 4. Results of the complete study should be-
come available in 2005.
Dussault et al. (2002) presented preliminary results of a
large case-control study comparing the presence of cannabis
in crash involved drivers (N = 354) to presence of cannabis
in drivers participating in a roadside survey (N = 11574)
between 1999 and 2001 in Quebec, Canada. The survey
sample was distributed proportionally to the number of
crashes per time of day (eight 3-h periods) and day of the
week (7 days). Cannabis was detected in urine of 19% of all
cases whereas the same drug was detected in urine or saliva
of 6.2% of the controls. Actual participation rate among
controls as deﬁned by how many controls were willing to
provide a saliva or urine sample was 84.6%. Case-control
analysis suggested that cannabis is associated with twice the
risk of being fatally injured in trafﬁc (OR 2.2; CI: 1.5–3.4).
Sharp elevations in crash risk were found for combined use
of cannabis with alcohol (BAC > 0.08 g/dl; OR 80.5; 95%
CI 28.2–230.2), cocaine (OR 8.0; 95% CI: 3.1–20.7), and
benzodiazepines (OR 21.3; 95% CI: 5.3–86.0). Remarkably,
a culpability analysis of all cases did not reveal a signiﬁcant
rise in crash risk in cannabis users, indicating that this type
of analyses may be less conclusive.
3. Experimental studies of cannabis and performance
Determination of the effect of THC on performance has
mostly been based on information provided by the ﬁeld of
psychopharmacology. Psychopharmacologists have devised
a large number of “psychomotor” tests, characterized by
contingent motor responding to an imposed discrete or con-
tinuous signal (e.g. reaction time, attention, tracking, and

J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
113
critical ﬂicker/fusion frequency tests), and “cognitive” tests
for measuring various mnemonic functions but also deduc-
tive reasoning. Finally, tests were developed to measure
some aspects of “real life” performance such as driving in a
simulator, through staged maneuvers on a course closed to
other trafﬁc or on public roads in actual trafﬁc. Experimen-
tal studies have followed both parallel group and crossover
designs, most with both placebo- and alcohol controls. The
great advantage of experimental studies that have been
conducted is their ability to determine the intrinsic pharma-
cological effects of THC on performance without the con-
founding factors that always obscure or exaggerate the effect
in the natural environment. However, until now the experi-
mental approach has been mostly limited to studies assessing
the acute effects of THC on performance, i.e. the effects of
THC on performance after a single dose. Experimental data
on performance effects after repeated doses of THC is gen-
erally lacking. As a consequence, it is currently not known
whether THC users adapt to acute effects of this drug as a
result of tolerance. Neither have the effects of THC been sys-
tematically studied in novel users versus experienced users
to establish differences in sensitivity between subgroups of
users. These issues will certainly gain importance with the
possible introduction of cannabis as a medicinal drug for
the (sub)chronic treatment of pain or inﬂammation. It is for
this reason that the Institute of Medicine, Washington DC,
advises to assess the cognitive and psychomotor functioning
before and regularly during the course of a chronic regi-
men of cannabis treatment to determine the extent to which
tolerance to the impairing effects of cannabis develops and
whether new problems develop (Watson et al., 2000).
3.1. Psychomotor performance and cognition
Numerous experimental studies have been conducted
to investigate the effects of THC on isolated cognitive
functions and psychomotor skills related to driving per-
formance. These have generally shown that THC in doses
between 40 and 300 g/kg causes a dose dependant reduc-
tion in performance at laboratory tasks measuring memory
function, divided and sustained attention, reaction time,
tracking or motor control (reviews: Moskowitz, 1985;
Chesher, 1986; Chait and Pierri, 1992; Robbe, 1994;
Berghaus et al., 1998a; Solowij, 1998; EMCDDA, 1999).
One of the most consistently reported behavioral effects of
THC is a disruption in the free recall of previously learned
information. Recall of items learned before cannabis use is
generally not affected, suggesting that THC impairs learn-
ing and the acquisition of information but not its retrieval
from memory. Short-term or working memory is generally
impaired in complex tasks, but at high doses also in simple
tasks.
The magnitude of the THC effects on performance fur-
thermore varied with the application form, i.e. smoking
or oral intake, and time post THC use. Berghaus et al.
(1998a,b) conducted a meta-analysis in 87 studies on the
effects of THC on psychomotor function, including tracking,
reaction time performance, perception, eye-hand coordi-
nation, body sway, signal detection, divided or sustained
attention tasks. Their analysis demonstrated that the percent-
age of psychomotor tasks showing signiﬁcant performance
impairment after THC was highest during the ﬁrst hour
after smoking or between 1 and 2 h after oral intake. Peak
impairment after THC was comparable to alcohol induced
performance impairment seen at blood alcohol concentra-
tions >0.05 g/dl. The number of signiﬁcant performance
effects sharply declined to about zero over 3–4 h after
THC use. Only higher doses of THC produced prolonged
performance impairment. The authors also established a
concentration–effect curve, which indicated that, at least
for low concentrations, plasma concentrations of THC are
approximately linearly related to the magnitude of perfor-
mance impairment. This relation was almost identical in
experiments with smoking compared to experiments with
oral intake of cannabis. In general, performance declined
in about 35% of all tests applied at plasma concentrations
of about 5 ng/ml THC, when compared to placebo. Impair-
ment increased with higher plasma levels of THC. Max-
imal performance decrement, i.e. impairment in 70–80%
of all psychomotor tests, was seen at concentrations be-
tween 14 and 60 ng/ml THC. The THC concentration effect
curve was based on all experimental tests included in the
meta-analysis. The majority of these experimental tests
were conducted between 15 min and 4 h after drug intake.
THC concentrations were estimated from dose and time
of testing by means of pharmacokinetic modeling (Sticht
and Käferstein, 1998). A summary of the major ﬁndings
from Berghaus et al.’s meta-analysis is given in Table 2 and
Fig. 1.
3.2. Driving simulators and on-the-road driving tests
A potential disadvantage of experimental laboratory stud-
ies is that it is often unknown whether tests of skills related
to driving serve as a good model for the driving task as a
whole. Many tests are short and relatively simple and do not
necessarily reﬂect performance in the real world. Driving
is probably one of the most complex psychomotor tasks. It
is difﬁcult to conceive, much less simulate, every situation
that confronts drivers. Tests for measuring effects of drugs
in driving simulators, over closed-course driving terrain or
on real roads in normal trafﬁc are most likely to approach
reality. Yet, also these tests can often measure only parts of
the total driving behavior. However, it is generally accepted
that the closer a test approaches reality, the better the chance
of measuring effects that cause crashes.
Studies in interactive driving simulators (Smiley et al.,
1981; Stein et al., 1983; Smiley, 1986; Sexton et al., 2000)
showed that THC doses up to 200 g/kg increased lateral po-
sition variability, headway variability, and caused subjects to
ignore navigational information. The highest dose increased
speed variability and caused the subjects to hit roadway

114
J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
Table 2
Frequency of performance impairments (%) observed in the total number of psychomotor tests applied in 87 experimental studies as a function of dose,
time after dosing and route of administration of THC
THC-dose
(mg)
Time after smoking (h)
<1
1–2
2–3
3–4
4–5
Impaired (%)
# Tests
Impaired (%)
# Tests
Impaired (%)
# Tests
Impaired (%)
# Tests
Impaired (%)
# Tests
Route of THC administration: smoking
<9
61
271
36
33
(30)
10
(0)
10
(0)
11
9–18
53
193
38
48
(38)
8
(0)
6
(0)
2
≥18
64
64
36
28
(40)
10
(53)
15
(67)
3
Overall
58
528
37
109
36
28
26
31
(13)
16
Route of THC administration: oral
<9
(33)
3
14
49
27
37
(8)
13
–
–
9–18
(0)
3
39
41
42
45
(18)
17
–
–
≥18
(0)
3
60
45
(40)
15
(33)
15
(45)
11
Overall
(11)
9
37
135
36
97
20
45
(45)
11
Performance decrements associated with less than 20 psychomotor assessments are put in brackets because of their limited predictive validity (adapted
from: Berghaus et al., 1998a (2)).
obstacles more often and to react more slowly to subsidiary
task demands. Yet, THC also caused subjects to drive in a
more conservative manner. They maintained a longer head-
way, refused more opportunities to pass, and when they did,
began this maneuver at greater distance from the approach-
ing vehicle. However, this compensatory behavior was never
sufﬁcient to fully overcome the overall impairing effect of
cannabis. Studies designed to test the effects of THC on ve-
hicle handling performance during staged maneuvers on ter-
rain closed to trafﬁc generally failed to show any dramatic
changes in performance (Attwood et al., 1981; Casswell,
1979; Peck et al., 1986). However, THC doses and num-
ber of subjects in these studies were generally too low to
achieve sufﬁcient statistical power to detect any drug effect
on performance.
Fig. 1. Frequency of performance decrements (%) observed in the total number of psychomotor tests applied in 87 experimental studies as a function of
THC concentration in plasma after eating (---) and smoking (—) cannabis (adapted from Berghaus et al., 1998a (2)).
Klonoff (1974) was the ﬁrst to conduct a driving test
in actual trafﬁc. A total of 38 subjects were divided over
separate groups to receive placebo, THC 4.9 or 8.4 mg. Af-
ter smoking subjects drove for 45 min on city streets of Van-
couver while aspects of their performance were rated by a
professional examiner from the State Department of Motor
Vehicles. No evidence was given of the reliability of these
subjective judgments, and this may have been the source of
the large variability found in performance after cannabis.
Out of 11 scales of subjective judgments that were used in
this study only three seemed to be signiﬁcantly affected fol-
lowing the highest dose: concentration, care while driving
and judgment.
The most comprehensive series of driving tests in ac-
tual trafﬁc were conducted by a group of researchers at

J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
115
Fig. 2. Mean SDLP (+SE) in the Road Tracking Test after incremental doses of THC alone and after THC combined with alcohol as measured in
studies by Robbe (1) and Ramaekers et al. (31), respectively. Alcohol concentrations reﬂect the subjects’ mean BACs while conducting the driving
test. Signiﬁcance of changes in SDLP is indicated as follows: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. Mean (range) plasma THC concentrations after 100, 200, and
300 g/kg were 7.9 (0.8–17.2), 12.0 (1.5–27.1), and 16.1 (4.7–30.9) ng/ml (1).
Maastricht University, The Netherlands. Robbe (1994, 1998)
investigated the effects of THC 0, 100, 200, and 300 g/kg
on performance in a 1 h Road Tracking Test and a 30 min
Car-Following Test conducted on a primary highway, as well
as the effects of alcohol and THC 100 g/kg on performance
in a City Driving Test. The combined effects of THC and
alcohol on performance in the same tests were further in-
vestigated in subsequent studies (Robbe, 1998; Ramaekers
et al., 2000; Lamers and Ramaekers, 2001). All subjects
were recreational users of cannabis. THC produced a dose
related increment in the standard deviation of lateral po-
sition (SDLP), a measure of lateral position variability or
“weaving”, during the Road Tracking Test. Reaction time to
speed accelerations/decelerations of a leading vehicle and
general driving proﬁciency were not affected by THC in the
Car-Following Test and the City Driving Test, respectively.
The effects of THC on lateral position variability were mod-
erate and comparable to that of an alcohol dose producing a
BAC of about 0.05 g/dl, the legal limit for driving under the
inﬂuence in most European countries. However, its combi-
nation with a low dose of alcohol (i.e. BAC < 0.05 g/dl)
produced severe performance impairment in the Road Track-
ing Test, and to lesser extents also in the Car-Following and
City Driving Test. There was no signiﬁcant interaction be-
tween alcohol and THC, indicating that the effects were ad-
ditive. When compared to a previously established alcohol
calibration curve (Louwerens et al., 1987), the combination
of THC 100 and 200 g/kg with alcohol produced a rise in
mean SDLP the equivalent of that associated with BACs of
0.09 and 0.14 g/dl, respectively. A summary of the effects
of THC and alcohol on lateral position variability is given
in Fig. 2. Values on the Y-axis indicate change scores from
placebo.
4. Discussion
The epidemiological literature has provided conﬂicting
information on the role of THC in performance impairment
and motor vehicle crashes. Among epidemiological studies,
case-control studies are limited in number but generally pro-
vide evidence supporting an association between cannabis
and increased crash risk. The majority of epidemiological
studies are culpability studies and several of these show
little evidence that drivers who only used cannabis are more
likely to cause accidents than drug free drivers. In contrast,
experimental studies have convincingly and repeatedly
demonstrated that THC in doses up to 300 g/kg causes
impairment of various cognitive and psychomotor func-
tions and of driving performance as measured in driving
simulators or on-the-road tests. The magnitude of these per-
formance impairments were comparable to alcohol induced
performance impairment seen at BACs ≥0.05 g/dl, and
should be considered as practically relevant. The reason for
the apparent discrepancy between experimental and culpa-
bility studies is largely unknown but may be related to inad-
equate attribution of cannabis use to crashed drivers. These
frequently relied on the detection of an inactive metabolite
of THC in urine of drivers to establish the use of cannabis.
However, this metabolite, THC–COOH, can be assessed in
body ﬂuids for hours and days and is not a reliable indication
of recent cannabis use or impairment. Recent exposure to
cannabis can only be safely assumed in the minority of cul-
pability studies that determined cannabis use by the presence
of THC in the blood. This latter procedure was only followed
in two surveys. Culpability odds ratios in THC positives
were generally higher than those in THC–COOH positives.
Moreover, culpability odds ratios in THC positives were

116
J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
three to six times as high as compared to drug free drivers,
depending on the concentration of the drug detected in blood.
Together, these data indicate that recent cannabis use may
increase crash risk, whereas, past use of cannabis as deter-
mined by the presence of THC–COOH in drivers does not.
There are more general limitations to culpability stud-
ies that should be considered as well. The analysis assumes
that drug free drivers involved in crashes are representative
for the driving population at large. If so, culpability odds
ratios may well establish reliable estimates of odds ratios
that would be obtained in case-control studies using non
crash drivers from the general driving population as con-
trol. However, this may not always be the case. Bates and
Blakely (1999) pointed out that outcome misclassiﬁcation
may introduce bias. Determination of culpability status is
not exact and there may be a tendency to misclassify drivers
who are in fact responsible for the accident as not, or vice
versa. However, it is noteworthy that studies that established
cannabis use by measuring THC in blood (Hunter et al.,
1998; Drummer et al., 2003b) all used an identical method
for establishing driver culpability. The fact that one of these
surveys reported increased culpability rates in injured drivers
therefore most likely reﬂects the large THC concentrations
found in these particular crash victims and not a structural
difference in outcome classiﬁcation between studies.
Bias may also occur if the control group of drug free
cases is not controlled for confounding factors. Confound-
ing could occur if there are lifestyle factors associated with
cannabis use that are also independent risk factors for traf-
ﬁc crashes such as age, sex, time of accident or the use of
alcohol. Confounding by alcohol is always avoided in cul-
pability studies by excluding cases with alcohol present in
their blood from statistical analyses of risk associated with
cannabis. However, the potential role of other confounders
is generally not taken in consideration. The possibility there-
fore exists that culpability studies identify an elevated risk
of dying in road accidents if one is young, male and driving
on weekends, instead of an elevated crash risk after recent
use of THC as suggested. However this is not likely to be
the case in the only culpability study so far that showed el-
evated crash risk in THC positive drivers. Drummer et al.
(2003b) adjusted for potential confounders such as age, sex,
crash type, jurisdiction and year of collection in their anal-
ysis, which provided extra support to their notion that the
rise in culpability ratio was caused by cannabis and not by
some other factor.
Recent epidemiological studies of the relation between
cannabis and motor vehicle crashes have also involved
a number of case control designs. The majority of these
studies have suggested that cannabis is associated with
twice the risk to become involved in trafﬁc accidents. Two
case-control studies seem of particular interest because they
have used the classic study procedures that have previ-
ously been validated for alcohol in the Grand Rapids study
(Borkenstein et al., 1974). Basically these studies have com-
pared the prevalence of cannabis use among crashed drivers
to the prevalence of cannabis among the drivers who were
passing the same roads in same time period. This approach
is generally accepted as a very reliable and solid method for
establishing drug related crash risk. Epidemiologists have
however long refrained from conducting such studies in
cannabis research because of the participation problem. That
is, identiﬁcation of cannabis would require a blood sample
from control drivers on a voluntary basis. Because cannabis
is an illegal drug it is likely that drug users would be less
willing to participate in the study than non-drug users. This
would potentially bias study results and inﬂate odds ratios.
Possible alternatives to blood sampling would be to col-
lect non-invasive matrices such urine and saliva as applied
in the studies by Dussault et al. (2002) and Movig et al.
(2003). In both studies the response rates among controls
were reasonably high, i.e. around 80–85%, which indicates
that most controls are willing to cooperate in roadside drugs
testing. Though not optimal, these numbers should increase
conﬁdence in the feasibility of case control designs for
establishing the relation between cannabis and crash risk.
Experimental and epidemiological research converges on
the fact that the association between THC and driver im-
pairment is dose related. Odds ratios for accident culpability
were shown to increase with increasing concentrations of
THC in the blood of (fatally) injured drivers. Likewise, per-
formance impairments in psychomotor or cognitive tests and
lateral position variability in experimental driving tests were
shown to gradually increase with increasing doses of THC.
This may prove relevant since it has been argued that most
THC doses employed in experimental research have been
less than those used for recreational purposes in real-life.
In a dose ﬁnding study by Robbe (1994) 23 subjects who
were all recreational users of THC indicated that they had
achieved their desired psychological effect after smoking
a mean dose of 300 g/kg THC.1 The range of this pre-
ferred dose varied between 194 and 524 g/kg THC indicat-
ing considerable inter-individual variation. It is thus likely
that drivers in the general population will at times use doses
that are higher than the ones used in experimental studies
or associated with average concentrations detected in epi-
demiological surveys. It can be predicted from the currently
available experimental data that the use of higher doses (i.e.
>300 g/kg THC ) will be associated with severe driving
impairment, equivalent to BACs > 0.08 g/dl.
The clear dose/concentration-effect relation between
cannabis and driver impairment or crash risk raises the
question whether a ‘per se’ limit could be identiﬁed above
which drivers are always at risk. Meta-analyses of exper-
imental performance data provide some good indication
that maximal performance impairment will be achieved
at THC concentrations >14 ng/ml in plasma (or >7 ng/ml
when measured in whole blood). However, it has not been
1 For comparison: identical to smoking a marijuana cigarette of 767 mg
containing 2.6% or about 20 mg THC by a person of average weight.

J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
117
established yet whether performance impairment observed
at such a concentration also coincides with an elevated crash
risk. The elevated culpability ratio’s observed in Drummer
et al.’s (2003a,b) analyses applied to a large group of THC
positives with widely varying plasma concentrations, i.e.
between 1 and 100 ng/ml THC in blood. It is impossible to
tell which part of the distribution was actually responsible
for the elevated OR observed in this sample. The elevated
mean OR pertains to the whole distribution range and may
be much less in cases with low THC concentrations and
much higher in cases at the opposite end of the distribution.
What is needed is a detailed analysis of the crash risk for
THC positives as a function of THC concentration. Hunter
et al. (1998) provided a ﬁrst indication of a dose related ef-
fect of cannabis on culpability ratio but primarily for THC
concentration ranges below 2 ng/ml. Their approach should
now also be extended to cases with higher THC concentra-
tions in order to conﬁrm and support current notions on per
se limits from experimental performance data.
It is also absolutely clear from epidemiological and ex-
perimental studies that the combination of alcohol and THC
plays a major role in performance impairment and motor ve-
hicle crashes. The epidemiological evidence shows that the
combination of alcohol and THC is over-represented in in-
jured and dead drivers, and particular in those responsible
for the accident to occur. Experimental studies have shown
that alcohol and THC combined can produce severe per-
formance impairment even when given at low doses. The
combined effect of alcohol and cannabis on performance
and crash risk appeared additive in nature, i.e. the effects
of alcohol and cannabis combined were always comparable
to the sum of the effects of alcohol and THC when given
alone.
Experimental studies furthermore indicate that not all
driving tasks are equally sensitive to the detrimental effects
of THC. Performance was always worst in tests measuring
driving skills at the operational level, i.e. tracking and speed
adjustment, as compared to performance in tests measuring
driving performance at the maneuvering level, i.e. distance
keeping and braking, and the strategic level, i.e. obser-
vation and understanding of trafﬁc, risk assessment and
planning. Strategic and maneuvering levels are particularly
demanding of resources in that they require effortful pro-
cessing and attention. Thus, processing is relatively slow
and ﬂexible. In contrast, the operational level is considered
to be an automatic, routine process, which is fast and rela-
tively inﬂexible. Drivers may be particularly vulnerable to
detrimental effects of THC in trafﬁc situations were they
speciﬁcally employ driving skills that are operated at lower
automated levels, such as during highway driving. The im-
plication might be that drivers under the inﬂuence of THC
might be more likely to be involved in speciﬁc types of
trafﬁc accidents such as single vehicle crashes. Culpability
studies by deﬁnition have neglected this possibility, since
drivers involved in this type of accident are practically
always responsible, irrespective of drug use.
5. Conclusions
• THC has been shown to impair cognition, psychomotor
function, and actual driving performance in a dose related
manner.
• The degrees of impairment observed in laboratory or ac-
tual driving tests after doses up to 300 g/kg THC were
comparable to the impairing effects of an alcohol dose
producing a BAC ≥0.05g/dl, the legal limit for driving
under the inﬂuence in most European countries.
• There is no indication that past use of THC alone af-
fects crash risks, but there is growing evidence that recent
use of THC increases the risk for motor vehicle accidents
compared to drug free drivers, particularly at higher con-
centrations.
• Detrimental effects of THC appear more prominent in
highly automated driving behavior, as compared to more
complex driving tasks that require conscious control.
• The effects of THC and alcohol on driving performance
and risk of motor vehicle crashes appear to be additive,
but the sum can be large and potentially dangerous. Com-
bined use of THC and alcohol produces severe driving
impairment and sharply increases the risk of drivers’ ac-
cident culpability as compared to drug free drivers, even
at low doses.
References
Attwood, D.A., Williams, R.D., Bowser, J.S., McBurney, L.J., Frecker,
R.C., 1981. The effects of moderate levels of alcohol and mari-
juana, alone and in combination on closed-course driving perfor-
mance. ((81-RSU-17)), Defence and Civil Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Downsview, Ontario.
Bates, M.N., Blakely, T.A., 1999. Role of cannabis in motor vehicle
crashes. Epidemiol. Rev. 21, 222–232.
Berghaus, G., Schultz, E., Szegedi, A., 1998a. Cannabis und fahrtˆu
chtigkeit. Ergebnisse der experimentelle forschung. In: Berghaus, G.,
Krˆuger, H.P. (Eds.), Cannabis im Straßenverkehr, Gustav Fisher Ver-
lag, Stuttgart, pp. 73–97.
Berghaus, G., Krˆuger, H.P., Vollrath, M., 1998b. Beeinträchtigung fahrrel-
evanter leistungen nach rauchen von cannabis und alcoholconsum.
Eine vergleichende metaanalyse experimenteller studien. In: Berghaus,
G., Krˆuger, H.P. (Eds.) Cannabis im Straßenverkehr, Gustav Fisher
Verlag, Stuttgart, pp. 99–111.
Borkenstein, R.F., Crowther, R.F., Shumate, R.P., Ziel, W.B., Zylman, R.,
1974. The role of the drinking driver in trafﬁc accidents (the Grand
Rapids study). Blutalcohol 11, s7–s13.
Budd, R.D., Muto, J.J., Wong, J.K., 1989. Drugs of abuse found in fatally
injured drivers in Los Angeles County. Drug Alcohol Depend 23 (2),
153–158.
Casswell, S., 1979. Cannabis and alcohol: effects on closed course driv-
ing behaviour. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Confer-
ence on Alcohol, Drugs and Trafﬁc Safety. Melbourne 23–28 January
1977.
Chait, L.D., Pierri, J., 1992. Effects of smoked marijuana on human per-
formance: a critical review. In: Murphy, L., Bartke, A. (Eds.), Mar-
ijuana/cannabinoids: neurobiology and neurophysiology. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, pp. 387–423.

118
J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
Chesher, G.B., Starmer, G.A., 1983. Cannabis and Human Performance
Skills (Grand Report Series ). Drug and Alcohol Authority Research,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Chesher, G.B., 1986. The effects of alcohol and marijuana in combination:
a review. Alcohol, Drugs Driving 2, 105–200.
Cimbura, G., Lucas, D.M., Bennett, R.C., Warren, R.A., Simpson, H.M.,
1982. Incidence and toxicological aspects of drugs detected in 484
fatally injured drivers and pedestrians in Ontario. J. Forensic. Sci.
27 (4), 855–867.
Cimbura, G., Lucas, D.M., Bennet, R.C., Donelson, A.C., 1990. Incidence
and toxicological aspects of cannabis and ethanol detected in 1394
fatally injured drivers and pedestrians in Ontario (1982–1984). J.
Forensic. Sci. 35, 1035–1041.
Daldrup, T., Reudenbach, G., Kimm, K., 1987. Cannabis und Alkohol im
Strassenverkehr [Cannabis and alcohol in trafﬁc]. Blutalkohol 24 (2),
144–156.
Donelson, A.C., Cimbura, G., Bennett, R.C., Lucas, D.M., 1985. The
Ontario monitoring project: Cannabis and alcohol use among drivers
and pedestrians fatally injured in motor vehicle accidents from March
1982 through July 1984. Trafﬁc Injury Research Foundation of Canada,
Ottawa, Canada.
Drummer, O.H., 1994. Drugs in drivers killed in Australian road trafﬁc
accidents. Victorian Institute of Forensic Pathology, Institute of Foren-
sic Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia (report no
0594).
Drummer, O.H., Gerostamoulos, J., Batziris, H., Chu, M., Caplehorn, J.,
Robertson, M.D., Swann, P., 2003a. The incidence of drugs in drivers
killed in Australian road trafﬁc crashes. Forensic. Sci. Int. 8, 154–
162.
Drummer, O.H., Gerostamoulos, J., Batziris, H., Chu, M., Caplehorn,
J., Robertson, M.D., Swann, P., 2003b. The involvement of drugs in
drivers of motor vehicles killed in Australian road trafﬁc crashes.
Accid. Anal. Prev., in press.
Dussault, C., Brault, M., Bouchard, J., Lemire, A.M., 2002. The con-
tribution of alcohol and other drugs among fatally injured drivers in
Quebec: some preliminary results. In: Proceedings of the 16th In-
ternational Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Trafﬁc Safety T2002,
Montreal, pp. 423–430.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction, 1999. Lit-
erature Review on the Relation between Drug Use, Impaired Driving
and Trafﬁc Accidents. (CT.97.EP.14) Lisbon: EMCDDA.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., 2001. Cannabis use and trafﬁc accidents
in a birth cohort of young adults. Accid. Anal. Prev. 33, 703–711.
Garriott, J.C., Di Maio, V.J., Rodriguez, R.G., 1986. Detection of cannabi-
noids in homicide victims and motor vehicle fatalities. J. Forensic.
Sci. 31 (4), 1274–1282.
Gerberich Goodwin, S., Sidney, S., Braun, B.L., Tekawa, T., Tolan, K.K.,
Quesenberry, C.P., 2003. Marijana use and injury events resulting in
hospitalisation. Ann. Epidemiol. 13, 230–237.
Hingson, R., Heeren, T., Mangione, T., Morelock, S., Mucatel, M., 1982.
Teenage driving after using marijuana or drinking and trafﬁc accident
involvement. J. Safety Res. 13, 33–38.
Hunter, C.E., Lokan, R.J., Longo, M.C., et al., 1998. The prevalence
and role of alcohol, cannabinoids, benzodiazepines and stimulants in
non-fatal crashes. Forensic Science, Department for Administrative
and Information Services, Adelaide, South Australia.
Klonoff, H., 1974. Marijuana and driving in real-life situations. Science
186, 317–323.
Lamers, C.T.J., Ramaekers, J.G., 2001. Visual search and urban city driv-
ing under the inﬂuence of marijuana and alcohol. Hum. Psychophar-
macol. Clin. Exp. 16, 393–401.
Logan, B.K., Schwilke, E.W., 1996. Drug and alcohol use in fatally
injured drivers in Washington State. J. Forensic. Sci. 41, 505–
510.
Longo, M.C., Hunter, C.E., Lokan, R.J., White, J.M., White, M.A.,
2000. The prevalence of alcohol, cannabinoids, benzodiazepines and
stimulants amongst injured drivers and their role in driver cul-
pability. Part II: the relation between drug prevalence and drug
concentration, and driver culpability. Accid. Anal. Prev. 32, 623–
632.
Louwerens, J.W., Gloerich, A.B.M., De Vries, G., et al., 1987. The
relationship between drivers’ blood alcohol concentration and actual
driving performance. In: Noordzij, P.C., Roszbach, R. (Eds.), Alcohol,
drugs and Trafﬁc Safety-T86, pp. 183–192.
Lowenstein, S.R., Koziol-Mclain, J., 2001. Drugs and trafﬁc crash re-
sponsibility: a study of injured motorists in Colorado. J. Trauma 50,
313–320.
Mason, A.P., McBay, A.J., 1984. Ethanol, marijuana and other drug use
in 600 drivers killed in single-vehicle crashes in North Carolina,
1978–1981. J. Forensic. Sci. 29, 987–1026.
McLean, S., Parsons, R.S., Chesterman, R.B., Dineen, R., Johnson, M.G.,
Davies, N.W., 1987. Drugs, alcohol and road accidents in Tasmania.
Med. J. Aust. 147 (1), 6–11.
Mercer, G.W., Jeffery, W.K., 1995. Alcohol, drugs, and impairment in
fatal trafﬁc accidents in British Columbia. Accid Anal. Prev. 27, 335–
343.
Moskowitz, H., 1985. Marijuana and driving. Accid. Anal. Prev. 17, 323–
346.
Movig, K.L.L., Matthijssen, M.P.M., Nagel, P.H.A., Van Egmond, T.,
de Gier, J.J., Leufkens, H.G.M., Egberts, A.C.G., 2003. Psychoactive
substance use and the risk of motor vehicle accidents, Accid. Anal.
Prev., in press.
Mura, P., Kintz, P., Ludes, B., Gaulier, J., Marquet, P., 2003. Comparison
of the prevalence of alcohol, cannabis and other drugs between 900
injured drivers and 900 control subject: results of a French collabo-
rative study. Forens. Sci. Int. 133, 79–2003.
O’Kane, Tutt, D.C., Bauer, L.A., 2002. Cannabis and driving: a new
perspective. Emerg. Med. 14, 296–303.
Peck, R.C., Biasotti, A., Boland, P.N., Mallory, C., et al., 1986. The effects
of marijuana and alcohol on actual driving performance. Alcohol,
Drugs Driving 2 (3–4), 135–154.
Ramaekers, J.G., Robbe, H.W.J., O’Hanlon, J.F., 2000. Marijuana, alcohol
and actual driving performance. Hum. Psychopharmacol. Clin. Exp.
15, 551–558.
Robbe, H.W.J., 1994. Inﬂuence of Marijuana on Driving. University of
Limburg, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Robbe, H.W.J., 1998. Marijuana’s impairing effects on driving are mod-
erate when taken alone but severe when combined with alcohol. Hum.
Psychopharmacol. Clin. Exp. 13, s70–s78.
Sexton, B.F., Turnbridge, R.J., Brook-Carter, N., Jackson, P.G., Wright,
K., Stark, M.M., Englehart, K., 2000. The inﬂuence of cannabis on
driving. Technical report 477, Transport Research Foundation Limited
(TRL), United Kingdom.
Smiley, A., 1986. Marijuana: On-road and driving simulator studies.
Alcohol, Drugs Driving 2 (3–4), 121–134.
Smiley, A.M., Moskowitz, H., Ziedman, K., 1981, Driving simulator stud-
ies of marijuana alone and in combination with alcohol. In: Proceed-
ings of the 25th Conference of the American Association for Auto-
motive Medicine, pp. 107–116.
Soderstrom, C.A., Triﬁllis, A.L., Shankar, B.S., Clark, We., Cowley, R.A.,
1988. Marijuana and alcohol use among 1023 trauma patients. Arch.
Surg. 123, 733–737.
Soderstrom, C.A., Dischinger, P.C., Kerns, T.J., Triﬁllis, A.L., 1995.
Marijuana and other drug use among automobile and motorcycle
drivers treated at a trauma center. Accid. Anal. Prev. 27, 131–
135.
Solowij, N., 1998. Cannabis and cognitive functioning. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, England.
Stein, A.C., Allen, R.W., Cook, M.L., Karl, R.L., 1983. A Simulator
Study of the Combined Effects of Alcohol and Marijuana on Driving
Behavior (DOT HS 806 405). System Technology Inc., Hawthorne,
CA.
Sticht,
G.,
Käferstein,
H.K.,
1998.
Grundbegriffe,
Toxikokinetik
and toxikodynamik. In: Berghaus, G., Krˆuger, H.P. (Eds.), Canna-

J.G. Ramaekers et al. / Drug and Alcohol Dependence 73 (2004) 109–119
119
bis im Straßenverkehr. Gustav Fisher Verlag, Stuttgart, pp. 1–
11.
Terhune, K.W., Fell, J.C., 1982. The role of alcohol, marijuana and other
drugs in the accidents of injured drivers. (Tech. Rep. under Contract
No. DOT-HS-5-01179). Calspan Field Services Inc., Buffalo, New
York.
Terhune, K.W., Ippolito, C.A., Hendriks, D.L., Michalovic, J.G., 1992.
The incidence and role of drugs in fatally injured drivers. National
Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, Final Report under Contract
No. DTNH 22-88-C-07069.
Watson, S.J., Benson, J.A., Joy, J.E., 2000. Marijuana and medicine: as-
sessing the science base. A summary of the 1999 Institute of Medicine
report. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 57, 547–552.
Williams, A.F., Peat, M.A., Crouch, D.J., Wells, J.K., Finkle, B.S., 1985.
Drugs in fatally injured young male drivers. Public Health Rep.
100 (1), 19–25.