---
title: "DOT-HS-808-939"
source: "DOT-HS-808-939.pdf"
converted: "2026-01-25"
pages: 46
---

# D
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Rational Highway
# =­ - xSA
Administration
WMAIMMMOV
DOT HS 808 939
July 1999
# Marijuana, Alcohol and
# Actual Driving Performance
This document is available to the public from the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161.

## This publication is distributed by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in
## the interest of information exchange. The opinions, findings and
conclusions expressed in this publication are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the Department of Transportation or the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The United States
Government assumes no liability for its contents or use thereof., If
## trade or manufacturer's name or products are mentioned, it is
because they are considered essential to the object of the publication
and should not be construed as an endorsement. The United States
Government does not endorse products or manufacturers.

Technical Report Documentation Page
1. Report No.
2. Government Accession No.
3. Recipient's Catalog No.
DOT HS 808 939
4. Title and Subtitle
5. Report Date
Marijuana, Alcohol and Actual Driving Performance
6. Performing Organization Code
IHP
8. Performing Organ ization Report No.
7. Author(s)
Hindrik W. J. Robbe, Ph.D. and James F. O'Hanlon, Ph.D.
P44-El
9. Performing Organization Name and Address
10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS)
Institute for Human Psychopharmacology
Maastricht University
11. Contract or Grant No.
P. O. Box 616
6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands
13. Type of Report and Period Covered
12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address
14. Sponsoring Agency Code
15. Supplementary Notes
16. Abstract
The purpose of this study was to empirically determine the separate and combined effects of Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and alcohol on actual driving performance. This was the first study ever in which the drugs' combined effects were
measured in a natural setting, i.e., on real roads in normal traffic.
Eighteen subjects between 20 and 28 years of age who were licensed to drive an automobile and who smoked marijuana and
drank alcohol at least once per month participated in the study. They were treated with drugs and placebo according to a
balanced, 6-way, observer- and subject-blind, cross-over design. On separate evenings they were given weight-calibrated
doses of THC and alcohol, or placebos for one or both substances as follows: alcohol placebo + THC placebo; alcohol placebo
+ THC 100 :g/kg; alcohol placebo + THC 200 :g/kg; alcohol + THC placebo; alcohol + THC 100 :g/kg; and, alcohol + THC 200
:g/kg. The initial alcohol dose was sufficient for achieving a peak blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of about 0.07 g/dl. Booster
doses were later given to sustain BAC around 0.04 g/dI during testing.
At each occasion, 30 min. after smoking, subjects performed four driving tests in the evening hours after dark between 21:00
and 23:15: two repetitions of a Road Tracking Test and two repetitions of a Car Following Test. The former test measured the
subjects' ability to maintain a constant speed of 100 km/h (62 mph) and a steady lateral position between the delineated
boundaries of the right (slower) traffic lane. The latter test measured the subjects' reaction times and headway variability while
driving 50 m (164 ft) behind a preceding vehicle that executed a series of alternating acceleration and deceleration maneuvers.
Both THC doses alone, and alcohol alone, significantly impaired the subjects' Road Tracking and Car Following performances.
The magnitude of the mean effects were minor after alcohol and THC 100 :g/kg and moderate after THC 200 :g/kg. Both THC
doses in combination with alcohol severely impaired the subjects' performance in both tests. While the effects of THC alone in
doses up to 200 :g/kg might be categorized as "moderate", they become "severe" when THC is combined with a moderate dose
of alcohol.
17. Key Words
18. Distribution Statement
Alcohol, marijuana, driving performance, ethanol, THC,
Document available to the public through the
highway safety, traffic safety, drugs and driving
National Technical Information Service,
Springfield, VA 22161
19. Security Classif. (of this report)
20. Security Classif. (of this page)
21. No. of Pages
22. Price
Unclassified
Unclassified
43
Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72)
Reproduction of completed page authorized
This form was electronically produced by Elite Federal Forms, Inc.

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
4
1. INTRODUCTION
7
2. METHODS
13
2.1 Subjects
13
2.2 Legality and Ethics
14
2.3 Design, Doses and Administration
14
2.4 Procedures
15
2.5 Driving Tests and Rating Scales
16
2.6 Statistical Analysis
19
3. RESULTS
21
3.1 Adjustments for Missing Data
21
3.2 Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC)
22
3.3 Road Tracking
23
3.4 Car Following
27
3.5 Intoxication Ratings
29
3.6 Driving Quality Ratings
29
3.7 Instructor's Comments
32
4. DISCUSSION
34
5. CONCLUSIONS
39
5.1 General Conclusions
39
5.2 Specific Conclusions
40
6. REFERENCES
41
2

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is the second that emerged from programmatic marijuana research conducted by
the Institute for Human Psychopharmacology, Maastricht University, under contract to the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) of the US Department of
Transportation. We thank NHTSA for supporting the research program and Mr. Ted
Anderson and Dr. James Frank for monitoring it. We appreciate the cooperation of the US
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) for providing the marijuana cigarettes.
The contract has been locally administered by the Dutch Road Safety Directorate of the
Ministry of Transport and Public Works under an intergovernmental agreement, and we
would like to thank Dr. Jan Busstra for monitoring the project locally.
We are grateful to the District Attorney, Mr. H.W. Overbosch, and the Maastricht
University's Institutional Review Board for reviewing and approving the study. A permit for
obtaining, storing and administering marijuana was obtained from the Dutch Drug
Enforcement Administration.
We'd like to thank our colleagues, Cees van Leeuwen, MD, and Nienke Muntjewerff, MD,
for the medical supervision; Anita van Oers and Aldrik Schmitz du Moulin for their
assistance during data collection; and, Henk Brauers and Pitou Sweens, our licensed driving
instructors, for their important contribution of supervising the subjects while driving. Finally
we thank the subjects for their participation.
3

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Previous driving simulator and closed-course studies have failed to confirm what
epidemiologists' data suggest, i.e., that alcohol and A9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) interact
synergistically to produce greater impairment than the sum of the changes that each drug
produces separately. Yet with the methodological shortcomings of particular studies and the
general lack of test realism afflicting all, it can not be said that their failure to measure a
synergistic effect is particularly convincing.
The study described in this report represents another attempt to empirically determine the
separate and combined effects of THC and alcohol . on driving. It differs from its
predecessors by employing standardized tests for objectively measuring the drugs' effects on
driving performance in the natural environment; i.e., on real roads in normal traffic.
Eighteen volunteer subjects, comprised of men and women in equal proportions, participated
in the present study. The subjects were all university students between 20 and 28 years of
age who smoked marijuana and drank alcohol at least once. per month. All admitted having
previously driven under the influence of each drug separately but only three, of both
together. They were treated with drugs and placebo according to a balanced, 6-way,
observer- and subject-blind, cross-over design. On separate evenings they were given
weight-calibrated doses of THC and alcohol, or placebos for one or both substances as
follows: alcohol placebo + THC placebo; alcohol placebo + THC 100 µg/kg; alcohol
placebo + THC 200 i.g/kg; alcohol + THC placebo; alcohol + THC 100 µg/kg; and, alcohol
+ THC 200 kg/kg. The initial alcohol dose was sufficient for achieving a peak blood alcohol
concentration (BAC) of about 0.07 g/dl. Booster doses were later given to sustain BAC
around 0.04 g/dl during testing. THC was administered by smoking marijuana cigarettes (2.2
and 3.95% THC from the US National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIDA) which had been
weight-calibrated by cutting. Initial drinking preceded smoking by 60 min.
Driving tests began 30 min. after smoking at 21:00 hr. Subjects undertook them in pairs on
the same evening. One started with the Car Following Test and the other 4 min. later with
the Road Tracking Test. After driving on the highway for approximately 25 min., the first
subject drove off and awaited the second. When he/she arrived, the pair exchanged roles,
returned to the highway, and drove in the reverse direction until returning to the origin. The
same procedure was repeated twice so that each subject completed two repetitions of each
test. Testing concluded at approximately 23:15 hr.
Subjects were accompanied by licensed driving instructors having access to redundant
vehicle controls. In the Road Tracking Test, the subject attempted to maintain a constant
speed of 100 km/h (62 mph) and a steady lateral position between the delineated boundaries
4

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
of the right (slower) traffic lane. Standard deviation of lateral position (SDLP) was the
primary outcome variable. SDLP is a measure of road tracking error, in practical terms, a
composite index of allowed weaving, swerving and overcorrecting. Failures to restrict the
vehicle's lateral motion within lane boundaries were recorded together as the percentage of
time out of lane (TOL). The Car Following Test involved the use of two vehicles. The
preceding vehicle was under an investigator's control, and the following vehicle, the
subject's. The test began with the two vehicles traveling in tandem at speeds of 100 km/h
(62 mph). Subjects attempted to drive 50 m (164 ft) behind the preceding vehicle and to
maintain that headway as it executed a series of alternating acceleration and deceleration
maneuvers lasting 33 sec apiece. The investigator driving the preceding vehicle initiated each
maneuver by activating a microprocessor-driven cruise-control. The vehicle's speed then
rose or fell in a constant manner until arriving at a point 15 km/h (9.3 mph) higher or lower
than where it began. The investigator drove at the newly established speed for 0.5-5.0 min.
before initiating the next maneuver. About eight maneuvers in each direction were
accomplished over both repetitions of the test. Headway was continuously recorded as were
the subject's discrete reaction times (RTs) at the beginning of maneuvers. Average RT and
the standard deviation of headway (HsD) for acceleration and deceleration maneuvers,
separately, were the major dependent variables. Subjects rated their degrees of intoxication
before and after the entire series of tests. They also rated the quality of their driving
performance at the end of each test repetition. The instructors likewise rated the subject's
driving quality at the same times and in the same manner.
In statistical terms, both THC doses alone, and alcohol alone, significantly impaired the
subjects' Road Tracking and Car Following performances. In practical terms, the magnitude
of the mean effects were minor after alcohol and THC 100 tg/kg and moderate after THC
200 µg/kg. Both THC doses in combination with alcohol severely impaired the subjects
performance in both tests. The mean changes in SDLP from the placebo level after
combinations involving THC 100 and 200 p g/kg were evaluated relative to a previously
established alcohol calibration curve (Louwerens et al, 1987). The former combination
produced a rise in mean SDLP the equivalent of that associated with BAC=0.09 g/dl, and
the latter, the equivalent of BAC=0.14 g/dl. Mean TOL rose exponentially with SDLP.
Beginning at the placebo level of 0.2%, mean TOL increased with the severity of drug
effects until reaching 1.1 % after the combination of alcohol and THC 200 µg/kg. Mean RT
and HSD during deceleration maneuvers varied across treatment conditions in the same
manner. Beginning at the placebo level of 4.65 sec, mean RT lengthened to 6.33 sec (+36%)
under the combined influence of alcohol and THC 200.tg/kg. The change in mean HsD was
from 5.69 to 7.78 in (+37%). The subjects' and instructors' rating of driving quality clearly
reflected the adverse objective effects of alcohol and THC alone and in combination. In
addition, the instructors spontaneously recorded several cases, usually in combined drug
5

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
conditions, wherein a subject's aberrant behavior would have been dangerous were he/she to
operate the same way under natural driving conditions.
We concluded that marijuana smoking that delivers the relatively low-moderate THC doses
of 100 and 200 pg/kg impairs Road Tracking and Car Following performance. THC effects
are dose-related and persist unabated or even increase during 2'h hr after dosing. The
magnitudes of impairment observed after these doses of THC alone were not especially large
in historical comparison to those of other drugs and alcohol present in BACs above
0.08 g/dl. However, they do imply a loss of driving ability that could be serious in
exceptional traffic situations. The combination of THC with alcohol sufficient for attaining a
BAC of about 0.04 g/dl has very severe effects on driving performance. Subjects showing
those effects drove in a manner one would expect for drivers operating with BACs above
the per se definition of intoxication in some states, i.e., 0.08 g/dl. No unequivocal evidence
emerged from this study to indicate that the drug interaction is synergistic in the classic
pharmacological sense. However, the exponential rise of TOL from conditions where THC
and alcohol were given separately to those where they acted in combination suggests that
the interaction can increase the risk of certain types of crashes in the same manner. That
being the case, the practical consequences of driving after the combined use of THC and
alcohol would be the same whether their pharmacological interaction is synergistic or merely
additive.
6

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
1.
INTRODUCTION
There is no doubt that O9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) impairs its users' cognitive and
psychomotor abilities to an extent largely determined by the inhaled or ingested dose. It is
also certain that the dose preferred by cannabis smokers (around 300 µg/kg) is sufficient for
impairing performance in potentially dangerous tasks such as driving (Robbe & O'Hanlon,
1993). It is less certain that those doses cause the degrees of impairment that seriously
compromise driving ability, and if they do, whether many THC users choose to drive in that
condition. Both the severity of the users' impairment and their prevalence among the driving
population could be determined from an epidemiological survey measuring the relative
frequencies among drivers who do and do not become involved in crashes. These data
would permit calculation of the THC users' risk of crashing relative to that of drug-free
drivers. Relative risk (RR) is in fact the only commonly accepted index of any drug's hazard
potential for individual drivers, and in direct proportion to its usage prevalence, for the
driving population as a whole. Yet more than 20 years of epidemiological research on THC
has failed to establish the RR of drivers operating under its influence. Other results to
emerge from numerous studies over this period are little more than suggestive. The
epidemiologists' common failure is understandable. It is commonly thought that the
prevalence of THC use in the normal population can only be determined from the drug's
detection in blood samples provided by drivers at roadside checkpoints. With no means to
compel or convince normal motorists to provide control data, epidemiologists have had to
confine their attention to drivers from whom blood samples can be obtained after their
admittance to hospitals as the result of injuries sustained in crashes. Thus, epidemiologists
have only been able to measure the prevalence of THC use among injured drivers. Some
epidemiologists have found a relatively high prevalence of THC in a limited geographical
area, and others, significantly more THC users among drivers deemed responsible for
crashes than apparently innocent victims. However, these results are equivocal. A high
prevalence among injured drivers in one particular area might simply reflect a high usage
prevalence among the local population. Methods for assigning responsibility have differed
widely and those relying solely on police judgments may reflect their biases; e.g., suspected
drug users may more often be judged responsible than is actually the case. Moreover,
epidemiologists have always had to contend with a serious confounding factor; i.e., the
simultaneous presence of alcohol in the majority of drivers who test positive for THC.
Surveys conducted in widely separated localities have generally revealed the presence of
THC in between 4 and 12% of drivers who sustained injury or death in crashes (Cimbura et
al, 1980, 1982; Terhune, 1982; Chesher & Starmer, 1983; Donelson et al, 1985; Garriott et
al, 1986; Daldrup et-al, 1987; McClean et al, 1987). Occasionally, higher values have been
reported for groups of, predominately, young males operating in one or another large
American city (Williams et al, 1985; Soderstrom et al, 1988; Budd et al, 1989). Although
7

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
the prevalence of THC users in the general driving population was assumed to be lower in
almost every case, these data can not be accepted as evidence showing that THC was
responsible for the crashes. The reason is that alcohol, usually in concentrations associated
with a high crash risk, was also found in at least 50%, and sometimes as many as 90%, of
the same drivers. The latest and largest of the postmortem surveys (Terhune et al, 1992)
came closest to discriminating among the separate and combined effects of THC and alcohol
on crash risk. It involved a sample of 1,882 fatally-injured drivers from seven widely
separated American States during 1990-91. Drug-free drivers comprised 42.1% of the
sample, and those showing the presence of alcohol, 51.5%. THC was found in only 4.3%
and among them, three-quarters tested positive for alcohol as well. The investigators
undertook two different analyses for inferring causal relationships between these drugs and
crashes. First, they compared responsibility rates of subgroups using each drug separately
and in combination with that for the drug-free group. Responsibility in this case was
assigned by trained encoders using a standardized procedure for evaluating police reports.
Drug-free drivers were held responsible for 67.7% of their crashes. The responsibility rates
for drivers showing only the presence of alcohol depended upon their BACs. For those with
BACs below 0.10 g/dl it was 75.8%, and for those at or above that level, 93.9%. Drivers
showing only the presence of THC were 57.9% responsible; i.e., less often than drug-free
drivers, albeit not significantly. However, the group showing the combined presence of THC
and alcohol in any concentration at all, were held responsible for 94.6% of their crashes.
This rate differed significantly from the drug-free drivers' though not from the group's with
the highest BACs. The second analysis was for calculating the relative crash risk (RR) of
each subgroup whose number was sufficient for providing a reliable estimate. "Non­
responsible" drivers in the sample were defined as the control group, following the
assumption that they were representative of the general driving population with respect to
drug and alcohol prevalence. The investigators were aware that their definition of the
control group is unconventional and urged caution in interpreting the results. But as they
said, those results were certainly "suggestive." Relative to drug-free drivers whose RR was
defined as 1.0, those showing BAC<0.10 g/dl operated with a RR=1.2. Drivers operating
with BAC_0.10 g/dl did so with RR=6.5. Strikingly, drivers operating with THC and any
BAC had a RR=11.9. Unfortunately, only 19 fatally injured drivers were found with only
THC in their blood, too few for estimating the RR.
Terhune et als results suggest a particularly dangerous synergistic (i.e., multiplicative)
interaction between THC and alcohol but they carefully avoided drawing that conclusion.
Their data were insufficient for confirming the impressions that drivers using only THC were
less likely than drug-free drivers to be responsible for fatal crashes; and, that those showing
the presence of both THC and alcohol were more likely to be responsible than others using
alcohol alone. The data were also insufficient for determining whether the combined drug
8

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
users' risk of fatal crash involvement increased more rapidly as a function of BAC than for
the drivers using alcohol alone. Besides, their risk estimates are questionable since there is
reason to doubt that "non-responsible" fatally injured drivers are representative of the
driving population in general: some of them may have been responsible in the sense of failing
to avoid the situations where the crashes occur. All doubts would have been avoided if the
control group was comprised of drivers who were not involved in crashes. But this
postmortem survey, like all before it, lacked the essential controls. Not surprisingly, the
investigators concluded that it would be pointless to undertake even larger postmortem
surveys in an effort to define THC's role in crash causality. Instead they recommended crash
surveys involving the more numerous injured but surviving drivers whose accounts of
antecedent events would better enable the assignment of responsibility; and, experimental
studies designed specifically to show THC and alcohol effects, alone and in combination.
Numerous experimental studies have already been undertaken for that purpose (reviews:
Chesher 1995; Robbe, 1994). Most are of limited relevance in the present context since the
laboratory psychomotor tests they employed were short and relatively simple, bearing almost
no resemblance to actual driving. It is only worth mentioning that no study measuring the
separate and combined effects of up to three doses of both alcohol and THC has ever shown
that the drugs' effects are more than additive. That is, their combined effects were essentially
no greater than the sum of changes that each drug produced separately. Chesher noted,
however, that the drugs' impairing effects in some laboratory tasks have differed
qualitatively. Thus, the combination might simultaneously degrade different mental functions
that independently affect performance in complex real-life tasks. That being the case, one
might expect the simultaneous effects of THC and alcohol to seriously degrade complex
performance, even if those effects are not synergistic in the classic pharmacological sense.
Driving is probably the most complex psychomotor task undertaken by ordinary individuals
on a routine basis. It is difficult to conceive, much less simulate, every situation that
confronts drivers. At best, tests for measuring drugs' effects in driving simulators, over a
closed-course driving terrain or on real roads and in normal traffic, can measure only a few
aspects of total driving behavior. Nonetheless, it would seem that the closer they approach
reality, the better their likelihood of measuring the effects that cause crashes. This assertion
has never been proven but its general acceptance is evident from the gradual development of
more realistic tests, both for use in simulators and on the road.
Smiley et al (1981), conducted the first study of THC and alcohol effects in an interactive
driving simulator. That system responded to the operator's control inputs by modifying its
displayed visual imagery according to normal vehicle dynamics, though on a fixed base. The
simulated tasks contained in a 45-min. scenario included driving on straight and curved road
segments, following a vehicle and passing when gaps in the oncoming traffic permitted,
9

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
changing the route in response to navigational information on signs and avoiding obstacles
that suddenly appear on the roadway. A visual choice reaction time was also superimposed
on driving. Three groups of marijuana users smoked cigarettes containing 0, 100 and
200 µg/kg THC on two occasions per dose, once with and once without alcohol. The
quantity of alcohol consumed varied between groups to reach blood concentrations of 0.00,
0.05 and 0.08 g/dI, respectively. To ensure high motivation, good driving was rewarded and
blatant errors, such as crashes, were penalized financially. The test began 15 min. after the
cessation of smoking. Both THC doses increased lateral position variability and the highest
dose increased speed variability during curve following. Both THC doses increased headway
variability, and the highest, lateral position variability during car following. Both caused the
subjects to ignore navigational information. The high dose caused the subjects to hit
roadway obstacles more often and to react more slowly in the subsidiary task than the
placebo. Yet both THC doses caused the subjects to drive in a more conservative manner.
They maintained a longer headway while car following, refused more opportunities to pass,
and when they did, began this maneuver at a greater distance from the approaching vehicle.
Alcohol's effects in this study were generally not significant. There were also no significant
interactions between the drugs' effects on any performance measure.
Stein et al (1983) conducted two studies of alcohol and marijuana effects using a similar
driving simulator and test scenario, lasting 15 min. Both studies followed a 2 (alcohol) x 3
(THC) cross-over design. Alcohol placebo and alcohol sufficient for producing a BAC of
0.10 g/dl were given in both. The THC doses were 0 (placebo), 50 and 100 µg/kg in the first
and 0,. 100 and 200 µg/kg in the second. As opposed to the lack of alcohol effects in the
earlier simulator study, these two showed alcohol's expected, significantly adverse effects on
practically every performance measure. Again in contrast to the earlier study, THC had
almost no significant effects. The rather benign exception was that the subjects drove at a
lower speed after the highest THC dose. The combination of drugs produced no consistent
signs of a pharmacodynamic interaction affecting performance. It did, however, produce a
marked rise in inter-subject performance variability, suggesting that some individuals might
have been severely affected. The combination with the highest THC dose also produced
significantly more "accidents" than alcohol did alone.
Four studies have followed the alternative approach of testing alcohol's and THC's effects
on vehicle handling performances during staged maneuvers on a terrain closed to normal
traffic (Casswell 1997; Attwood 1981; Smiley et al, 1986; Peck et al, 1986). Except for the
last, these studies seem of minor importance. The driving tests varied from one to the other
making their results difficult to compare. Casswell and Attwood treated small groups of
male volunteers, 13 and 8, respectively, in cross-over designs with higher doses of each drug
separately than when both were given in combination. THC doses were very low in all cases
(<90 µg/kg). Smiley et al administered more representative THC doses (100 and 200 pg/kg)
10

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
alone and in combination with alcohol sufficient for achieving a BAC of 0.05 g/dl, and also a
higher dose of alcohol alone (BAC=0.08 g/dl), but to separate groups of 9 men. So the
statistical power of their design was not greater than the others'. In any case the effects of
THC and alcohol alone, and in combination, were modest in every study and no sign of a
synergistic interaction was observed.
Peck et afs study was superior in most respects. It too followed a parallel group design with
21 male participants in each one. They were respectively treated with double placebo,
alcohol (BAC=0.08 g/dl) + marijuana placebo, alcohol placebo + THC 19 mg, and both
drugs combined. If these subjects could have consumed the entire THC dose, on the average
it would have been about 270.ig/kg. But considering the residual left after smoking, the
actual average dose was probably closer to 250 µg/kg. The subjects were tested in four
complete replications of test battery at 1-hr intervals beginning shortly after dosing. Ratings
of their proficiency were obtained from accompanying driving licensing examiners, from
observers stationed at points along the test route and from traffic police officers who
followed the subjects' vehicle in a patrol car. A computerized system recorded the subjects'
control movements and the vehicle's speed and lateral position relative to course delineation.
A risk acceptance test was included for measuring the subjects' willingness and ability to
drive through gaps that were slightly wider or narrower than the vehicle. Other tests
involved stopping in response to signals, making a forced lane change and driving through a
chicane. Several hundred performance variables were recorded and tested preliminary for
selecting those that twice discriminated between treatment effects with a "significance" level
of at least p±0.25 in separate battery repetitions. Only 12 variables were found significant
according to this unusually liberal criterion. These were taken together into, first
discriminant analysis for testing the global significance of the drugs' effects, then a canonical
analysis for separately testing the main effects of each drug separately and of their
interaction. The global effect was significant in all trials. The separate effects of both drugs
were also significant but not their interactive effect, leading to the conclusion that the effects
were additive. Yet they were modest indeed. The only sign that these relatively high doses of
THC and alcohol impaired driving performance to a practically relevant degree came from
the reports of the following police officers. They said they would have stopped 60% of the
drivers treated with both drugs if they had observed them behaving the same way in real-life.
The corresponding judgments for groups treated with alcohol and THC alone were 50% and
32%, respectively. But the officers also said they would have stopped 15% of the placebo
subjects. Either all subjects were exceptionally poor drivers or the officers were unusually
critical. Perhaps they were so critical because they knew that the drivers under observation
were likely (75% chance) to have taken drugs.
11

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
In short, previous driving simulator and closed-course studies have failed to confirm what
epidemiologists' data suggest, i.e., that alcohol and THC interact synergistically to produce
greater impairment than the sum of the changes that each drug produces separately. Yet
with the methodological shortcomings of particular studies and the general lack of test
realism afflicting all, it can not be said that their failure to measure a synergistic effect is
particularly convincing.
The present study represents another attempt to empirically determine the separate and
combined effects of THC and alcohol on driving. It differs from its predecessors by
employing standardized tests for objectively measuring the drugs' effects on driving
performance in the natural environment; i.e., on real roads in normal traffic. The same
approach has already been applied for assessing the separate effects of alcohol (Louwerens
et al, 1987) and THC (Robbe and O'Hanlon, 1993), as well as those of medicinal drugs in a
series of more than 50 studies (reviews: O'Hanlon 1984; O'Hanlon et al, 1986, 1995:
O'Hanlon & Ramaekers 1995). It is hoped that the present study, and one more to follow,
will conclusively demonstrate whether the drugs' combined effects are additive or
synergistic, and how much in either case.
12

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
2.
METHODS
2.1
Subjects
Male and female volunteers were solicited by an advertisement in the newspaper of the
Maastricht University. It described the general nature of the study and provided a telephone
number to call for further information. Respondents were preliminarily screened to
determine if they fulfilled the inclusion criteria: current use of both alcohol and marijuana
with respective frequencies of once per week and once per month, but neither daily;
possession of a valid driving license; driving experience of at least 1000 km/yr (620 mi/yr)
over the previous three years; willingness to comply with certain restrictions of daily living
activity (below); and, willingness to provide written informed consent. Those who
apparently satisfied all criteria were sent Information for Volunteers, which completely
described the study and its requirements, as well as questionnaires regarding personal
medical history and experience with alcohol and drugs. Volunteers wishing to continue
resumed contact for arranging a medical screening interview. The latter comprised a review
of the completed questionnaires, a physical examination, a standard 12-lead ECG
examination and the submission of blood and urine samples for routine clinical laboratory
determinations. Fractions of the urine samples were retained and assayed qualitatively, on
site, for drugs of abuse - amphetamines (including MDMA, called "ecstasy"), barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, cannabinoids, cocaine and opioids. Urine from females was also assayed
for (3-HCG to indicate pregnancy. Volunteers were excluded on the basis of results showing
any of the following: history or evidence of drug or alcohol abuse or dependency; history of
psychiatric or organic brain disorders; history or overt signs of serious cardiovascular,
respiratory, renal, hepatic, metabolic or neuromuscular disorders; necessity for the chronic
use of any systemic medication, except oral contraceptives; current use of any prescribed
psychoactive medication; the presence of any drug of abuse in urine, besides cannabinoids;
and for females, pregnancy or any reasonable possibility that pregnancy could occur during
participation in the study. One unusual exclusion criterion was added by local law
enforcement authorities as a condition for their approval of the study: volunteers having any
record of arrests for drug trafficking were to be excluded. For this purpose the Chief District
Attorney for the City of Maastricht reviewed a list of volunteers' names with their
knowledge and consent. The District Attorney neither retained nor copied the list and he
guaranteed no legal consequences for the individuals concerned. No volunteer was excluded
by this procedure but common knowledge that it would be applied might have dissuaded
some individuals from ever volunteering.
Eighteen subjects, 9 men and 9 women were selected. They ranged in age from 20 to 28
years (mean±SD, 22.7±2.1). All satisfied the inclusion criteria for driving experience with
13

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
one exception; i.e., a woman had been licensed to drive for only 20 months before enrolling.
She was allowed to enter the study for achieving a better balance between genders. The
longest any subject had held a driving license before enrolling in the study was 9.5 yr. For
the group as a whole, meant SD driving experience was 4.3±2.2 yr. The subjects declared
their alcohol drinking frequency was from 1 to 30 glasses of wine or beer per week
(14.2±8.8); and their marijuana smoking frequency from 1 to 12 times per month (2.3 ±2.3).
All said that they occasionally used both drugs in combination and admitted having driven at
least once under the influence of each one separately. However, only three admitted to
having driven under the combined influence of both. Subjects were paid NLG 650 (ca. US$
335) upon completion of the study.
2.2
Legality and Ethics
The study's protocol was reviewed and approved in sequence by the District Attorney and
the standing Medical Ethics Committee of Maastricht University. Subjects were treated
according to the international convention governing drug studies with human volunteers;
i.e., the Declaration of Helsinki (1964), and its subsequent amendments.
2.3
Design, Doses and Administration
The study followed a balanced, 6-way (2x3 factorial) observer- and subject-blind, placebo
controlled, cross-over design. Treatment orders were randomly assigned from those residing
in three, 6x6, Williams Squares.
Subjects began treatments by drinking alcohol or alcohol placebo. They continued by
smoking marijuana placebo or marijuana delivering THC in doses of 100 or 200 kg/kg. All
six combinations of alcohol and THC were consumed by all subjects on separate occasions.
These treatments are respectively designated as shown in Table 2-1.
Table 2-1 Abbreviations of treatment conditions.
Treatment condition
00
OTl
OT2
AO
AT,
AT2
Alcohol
placebo
placebo
placebo
alcohol
alcohol
alcohol
THC
placebo
100_Rg/kg
200 pg/kg
placebo
100 pg/k/kg
200 µg/kg
Alcohol dosing was designed to achieve a peak BAC of 0.06-0.07 g/dl before smoking and
0.04-0.05 g/dl during the driving tests. To achieve this, subjects ate two sandwiches while
drinking the initial dose; i.e., 0.6 g/kg of "pure" (99.8%) ethanol mixed with orange juice to
a volume of 300 ml and flavored with Grand Marnier essence for masking purposes. This
14

Marijuana / Alcohol Driving Study
was accomplished within 30 min. Subjects' BACs were monitored at 10 min. intervals for
30-60 min. after the cessation of drinking using a Lion S-D4 Breath Alcohol Analyzer.
Those failing to achieve the expected peak BAC were given a booster dose of 0.05-0.2 g/kg
in the same proportion to the mixer, whereas the others were given the mixer alone. A
second booster dose was given midway through the driving tests in almost all cases for
sustaining the desired BAC. Flavored orange juice was given at the same times and in
approximately the same volumes in the placebo alcohol conditions. Smoking followed the
cessation of the first alcohol dose by 60 min. and continued for the following 10 min. The
cigarettes were prepared beforehand for each individual from stock provided by the US
National Institute on Drug Abuse. Originally, placebo cigarettes (i.e., containing marijuana
leaf from which THC had been removed by ethanol extraction) and those containing the
drug were all 85 mm in length and 25 mm in circumference, weighing about 800 mg.
Cigarettes with THC concentrations of 2.2% and 3.95% were respectively used for
providing 100 and 200 µg/kg doses. These were cut to provide lengths appropriate for the
subjects' weights. Placebo cigarettes were similarly shortened. All were humidified over a
saturated sodium chloride solution at 20°C for 24 hr before consumption. Subjects smoked
them as completely as possible through a plastic holder in their customary fashion.
2.4
Procedures
Two subjects were tested per day. They were transported by an investigator to and from the
sites for treatment and testing. After arriving at 19:00 h, subjects yielded breath and urine
samples for confirming their compliance with prohibitions against prior use of alcohol and
drugs (below). Drinking, followed by smoking, proceeded until 20:40 hr. Thereupon the pair
of subjects was taken to the origin of the driving tests. There were two tests (below) that
were performed twice per session, all during darkness and in actual traffic. Each member of
the pair of subjects began performing a different test. One departed from the origin 2 min.
before and the other 2 min. after 21:00 hr. Both proceeded with their initial test assignments
while driving over the same 40 km (24.8 mi) highway segment until arriving at the highway
exit that marked the terminal, where the first subject awaited the second. When that
occurred, their test assignments reversed. The first subject resumed driving at 21:30 h,
crossed and re-entered the highway traveling in the opposite direction than before while
performing the opposite test. The second did the same after a 4 min. delay. Both paused for
15 min. after returning to the origin. Their BACs were monitored and a booster alcohol dose
was given, if needed. Beginning around 22:15 h, the subjects drove through another circuit
while repeating the same series of tests as before. Subjects rated their levels of intoxication
at the beginning and end of the entire sequence, and the quality of their performance, at the
end of each driving segment. An instructor accompanying the subjects similarly rated their
15

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
performance at these times. The same subjects always undertook the two driving tests in the
same order.
Successive test sessions were ordinarily scheduled. for particular subjects at weekly intervals.
They were forbidden to smoke marijuana or hashish outside.of the study, or, to take any
other illicit drug, from 7 days before their first session until the conclusion of the last. They
were told that the detection of any drug in urine samples provided at the beginning of a
session would cause their immediate dismissal. They were similarly forbidden to drink
alcohol for 24 hr before sessions. They were instructed to retire for and arise from sleeping
at normal times, and to,, avoid strenuous physical activities over the day before sessions.
Consumption of beverages containing caffeine and of solid food was prohibited for 2 hr
before session. And, smoking nicotine containing cigarettes was prohibited during the
sessions. Finally, the subjects were prohibited from participating in another biomedical
investigation, particularly if it involved drug taking; and, they were required to report the use
of any systemic medication taken for personal reasons.
2.5
Driving Tests and Rating Scales
General Driving Procedures.. Subjects operated a specially instrumented Volvo 240 GL
station wagon accompanied by a licensed- driving instructor. having access to redundant
vehicular controls from his position,in the front passenger's seat. They were told that the
instructor's primary role. was to ensure test safety but that they would be held responsible
under Dutch Law for any collisions that might occur. They were further told that they were
legally responsible not to undertake a test and to stop any in progress, if in doubt concerning
their ability to drive safely. They were advised that the instructor could require them to bring
the vehicle to, a halt on^the road shoulder if in his opinion their -performance was becoming
unsafe. No penalties or censure were attached to the subject's decision to avoid or stop
driving. Subjects were trained to perform .both driving tests in one complete rehearsal of all
procedures ' they would- later encounter after drug treatments. Their performance during
training 'rides" was evaluated by the. instructor and judged, normal in every case. Data
recorded during treatment sessions were edited and reduced by assistants using interactive
computer programs. These personnel were not informed of the nature of the treatments
given on particular occasions.
Road Tracking. The. standardized version of this test (Q'Hanlon, 1984) involves driving
over a.100 km (62 mi) highway circuitwith a short interruption for reversing the direction of
travel at the :mid-point. It normally. lasts about one, hour. The test was modified for the
purposes of the present study. It was given in two, 25. min. parts, separated by an interval of
45 min: Otherwise the test followed the standard model. It was given over that segment of
the 4-lane, divided, highway (A2) running north/south between the cities of Maastricht and
'16

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
St. Joost. The subject entered the highway and accelerated to achieve a speed of 100 km/h
(62 mph) in the right (slower) traffic lane. His/her instructions were to maintain that speed
and a steady lateral position between the delineated lane boundaries over the entire segment.
The subject was only allowed to deviate from these instructions for overtaking a slower
vehicle traveling in the same traffic lane. Upon arrival at the end of the segment, the subject
drove off the highway at the designated exit, parked the vehicle and awaited the next
scheduled activity. The vehicle contained systems for recording speed and lateral position.
The former originated from an electromagnetic sensor and pulse generator attached to the
drive wheels. Pulses were converted to an analog voltage, proportional to speed between 0
and 120 km/h. An electro-optical lateral position sensor was rack-mounted in protective
housing over the left rear corner of the vehicle. Its lens acquired an image of road surface
directly behind the vehicle, in effect focusing a 3-m band running at right angles to the
direction of travel on a linear array of 256 capacitor-coupled photodiodes. Luminance from
the left lane-line was normally the greatest falling upon the array, thus causing the most
rapid discharge of one particular diode-capacitor at any given moment. The position of that
diode was determined relative to a calibrated null-point by rapid (>100 Hz) electronic
scanning. The difference was used to generate an analog voltage proportional to the distance
the vehicle was to the right or left of lane-center. Full scale values were obtained when the
vehicle was ± 1.5 m from lane-center. Taking into account both the asymmetric location of
the sensor and the vehicle's width (1.6 m), maximum readings occurred when it was 0.38 m
onto the road shoulder or into the adjacent traffic lane. Analog signals were digitized by
Burr-Brown data acquisition cards using Labtech Notebook Software at a rate of 4 Hz.
These data were time-coded and filed on hard-disk in an on-board computer. Files were
copied on diskette and edited off-line to remove parts recorded during passing maneuvers
and when the lateral position signal was absent or distorted by noise. Data were preliminarily
analyzed by 5-km segments to yield mean and standard deviation values of both parameters;
and also, intervals when the vehicle was traveling outside of the assigned traffic lane. The
values finally recorded as tests scores over each segment were the following: mean speed
and lateral position (MSP, MLP); the square roots of pooled speed and lateral position
variances as estimates of each parameter's standard deviation (SDSP, SDLP); and, the
relative time out of lane (TOL). SDLP was the primary dependent variable. Normative data
provided by more than 600 healthy volunteers (<65 yr) who undertook the standard test
under placebo control conditions in the Institute's previous studies have shown that SDLP
follows a log-normal distribution with p.±a of approximately 3.06±0.19 log, cm units. Thus,
about 99% of the distribution fell between 12.5 and 35.5 cm; i.e., the normal limits. SDLP
scores from repeated measurements on the same subjects under control conditions are very
reliable; i.e., test-retest coefficients of correlation have typically varied between 0.7 and 0.9
for groups of 16-24 individuals (O'Hanlon et al, 1986, 1995). Moreover,, SDLP was
sensitive to the effects of all sedating drugs so far studied; e.g., to alcohol, in blood
17

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
concentrations as low as 0.035 g/dl (Vuurman et al, 1996) and to THC in doses at or above
100.tg/kg (Robbe & O'Hanlon, 1993).
Car Following. The second test was developed in a pilot study (Brookhuis et al, 1987) and
has been repeatedly applied in progressively improving versions (Robbe & O'Hanlon, 1993;
Ramaekers et al, 1994; Vuurman et al, 1996). It measures the driver's ability to perceive
changes in an immediately preceding vehicle's speed and react in a manner maintaining a
constant headway. The car following test was likewise given in two parts lasting about
25 min. apiece and separated by an interval of 45 min. The test involves two vehicles
traveling in tandem, the first operated by an investigator and the second by the subject. They
entered the highway and accelerated together to achieve a constant speed of 100 km/h
(62 mph). The subject was instructed to drive 50 m (164 ft) behind the preceding vehicle.
The instructor defined this distance for the subject at the beginning of each part of the test
but did not correct his/her headway again before coming to the end. Once the subject's
headway had stabilized, the investigator operating the preceding vehicle executed a series of
speed changes interpolated between 0.5-5.0 min. of constant driving. Speed changes in
alternating directions were controlled by computer manipulation of a conventional cruise-
control system. In each case the vehicle accelerated or decelerated in a constant manner
causing its speed to rise or fall by 15 km/h (9.3 mph) over 33 sec. The subject's task was to
follow this change as quickly and as accurately as possible by controlling his/her own
vehicle's speed using the accelerator pedal. Depending on the traffic, the number of
maneuvers during each repetition of the test varied between 4 and 10 in each direction (i.e.,
acceleration and deceleration), except in one case where only one maneuver was undertaken.
The preceding vehicle's speed was continuously measured and transmitted via telemetry to a
receiver on the following vehicle. A discrete signal to indicate the beginning of each
maneuver was inserted in that FM transmission. The transmission was demodulated and
digitally encoded at 4 Hz in a computer file along with the parallel record of the following
vehicle's speed. Headway was also measured directly by a ranging laser system (Sick DSE
2000) from a transmitter/receiver located in the center of the following vehicle's grill. This
system emitted 4.5 ms pulses at 40 Hz and registered their reflections from a solid 1.5 x 1.0
m screen mounted vertically on the back of the preceding vehicle. The phase angle between
each emission and reflection was measured and converted to an analog voltage, proportional
to distance. This signal was sampled, digitized and stored in the same manner as the others.
Distance recordings were occasionally incomplete owing to misalignment of the vehicles.
Missing data were estimated based on the observed differential vehicle speeds. Data were
analyzed off-line using an interactive computer program. The program identified the
initiation of each maneuver and when the preceding vehicle's speed began and ended its
linear change. Usually the following vehicle's speed rose or fell in parallel after the subject
recognized the change. In these cases, the program automatically recorded the driver's
reaction time (RT) when the speed of his/her vehicle had changed by_ 2 km/h in the correct
18

MarUuana /Alcohol Driving Study
direction. Sometimes however, the driver equivocated at the beginning of the maneuver
causing the vehicle's speed to vary erratically. In these cases, the analyst extrapolated
backward in time from where the subject's speed was clearly in linear ascent or decent to
2 km/h higher or lower than the last reversal. The difference in time between that point and
the beginning of the preceding vehicles speed change was taken as the subject's RT. The
distance separating the vehicles at the moment of the preceding vehicle's speed began to
change was measured as the initial headway. Parameters measured during maneuvers were
mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum headway (HM, HSD , HmN , HMAx). RT
and HSD are the most important variables, the former measuring the latency of the driver's
initial response and the latter, the precision of headway maintenance after that response. HM
is normally measured for possible statistical adjustment of HSD should HM vary between
conditions in a given experiment. HMAx and HMIN were measured for the first time in this
study for exploratory purposes.
Subjective Rating Scales. Subjects rated the degree to which they felt "under the influence"
of the given drug or combination on a continuous 100-mm scale. It ranged from "not at all"
to "the most I have ever experienced." This rating was made just before driving and
immediately after its final conclusion. They also rated the quality of their immediately
preceding driving performance after each test segment on a scale from 1 to 10 in 0.25 unit
steps. Subjects were told to rate their performance in the manner traditionally used in the
Dutch school system. The score of 10 means "perfect." Scores of 6 and above are "passing"
to "excellent." And, scores below 6 are "failing" to progressively diminishing degrees. The
accompanying driving instructor independently rated the subjects' performance at the same
times on the same scale and in the same manner.
2.6
Statistical Analysis
SDLP, the primary dependent variable, was analyzed in sequential steps. The first was a
check for Period and 1'-Order Carryover effects using the SAS (6.09) General Linear
Model (GLM) procedure with Type I sums of squares. Then Multivariate Analysis of
Variance (MANOVA) was applied according to the SPSS/PC+ procedure for repeated
measures to test the main effects of Alcohol, THC, Repetitions and their interactions. Data
entering this analysis were weighted by orthogonal polynomial coefficients so that the linear
and quadratic components of the THC effect over doses, and the same in interaction with
alcohol, could be separately tested. Finally, univariate (i.e., ANOVA) mean-pair contrasts
between values recorded in the double-placebo condition and every other one were made
using pooled error variance and the Sequential Bonferroni pa adjustment for multiple
comparisons (Overall & Rhoades, 1985). MLP, MSP and SDSP were analyzed the same
way. TOL was analyzed the same way after logwo transformation to adjust for the expected
19

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
skew in the raw data. All maneuvers performed by subjects in both repetitions of the Car
Following Test were analyzed to yield average values of RT, HM and HsD, by subject and
condition. Average values of HMnx were calculated for acceleration maneuvers, and of HMIN,
for deceleration maneuvers. The same analyses were planned for these parameters but
circumstances forced their analysis by other means (below). Subjective parameters were
analyzed by MANOVA for the effects of Alcohol, THC, Repetitions and their interactions.
The between-groups factor of Rater was added to assess differences between subjects' and
instructors' ratings of driving quality.
20

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
3.
RESULTS
3.1
Adjustments for Missing Data
Table 3-1 lists the tests which failed to yield useful data by condition, repetition within
condition and subject. • Data were missing for four (1.85%) planned repetitions of the Road
Tracking Test and 25 (11.6%) of the Car Following Test. One of the former could not be
undertaken by a subject whose BAC exceeded the acceptable limit at the time. The other
failures to record data in the Road Tracking Test were attributable to operator error. These
missing data were replaced in the planned analyses by scores recorded during the other
repetition of the test on the same nights.
Table 3-1 Road Tracking and Car Following tests which failed to yield useful data
by condition, repetition within condition and subject (for definition of treatment
conditions, see Table 2-1).
ROAD TRACKING
CAR FOLLOWING
COND.
REP.
SUB.
COND.
REP.
SUB.
OT2
1
02
00
1
16
AO
1
12
00
1&2
10
AT2
1
15
OT,
1
09
AT2
2
18
OT2
l&2
11
OT2
l&2
18
AO
1
04
AO
1
13
AO
1
14
AO
1&2
02
AO
1&2
08
AT,
2
01
AT,
1
10
AT,
1
11
AT,
1&2
06
AT2
1
07
AT2
2
11
AT2
2
15
AT2
1&2
04
Nearly all failures to record data in the Car Following Test were caused by the subjects'
unwillingness or inability to consistently maintain a following distance within the range of
the sensor/transmitter system. Though partial data were obtained in some of these cases,
they were thought to be too meager for deriving reliable parameter averages. The same
procedure for replacing data could not be followed since seven subjects did not provide any
useful data in either test repetition after particular treatments. It was not possible to apply
21_

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
the planned analyses to car following data. Instead, these data were combined across both
test repetitions within each condition to yield average parameter values. They were analyzed
in repeated-measures, 2-tailed, t-tests for making separate comparisons between double
placebo and every drug condition. The Sequential Bonferroni procedure was again used for
adjusting the pa criteria for multiple comparisons within each set of five.
3.2
Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC)
Subjects' BACs generally peaked in the range of 0.04-0.09 g/dl (meant SD,
0.067±0.015 g/dl) within 1 hour after drinking. Those whose peak BACs were below
0.06 g/dl were given the first booster dose just before marijuana smoking began at 20:30 hr.
Their BACs were again measured before beginning the driving tests at 21:00 hr. Descriptive
statistics are given in Table 3-2 for that and subsequent measurements which concluded
after driving at 23:15 hr.
Table 3-2 Mean± SD, and range, for BACs (gldl) measured in each THC condition at fixed
times before, during and after driving tests. Repetitions of the 25-min. driving tests started at
21:00, 21:30, 22:15, and 22:30 hours.
TIME (hh:mm)
THC
21:00
21:30
22:00
22:45
23:15
(µg/kg)
0
.047±.007
.040±.005
.033±.005
.038±.004
.034±.004
.034-.057
.030-.046
.024-.039
.032-.046
.026-.042
100
.048±.007
.044±.005
.039±.006
.040±.005
.034±.004
.036- .064
.035-.053
.028-.051
.028-.045
.028-.042
200
.048±.009
.042±.008
.035±.008
.038±.004
.033 ±.003
.037-.070
.029-.064
.020-.056
.029-.048
.026-.038
Subjects began driving in every THC condition with mean BACs close to the legal limit of
0.05 g/dl. Mean BAC declined to about 0.035 g/dl over the course of the next hour. The
second booster doses were then administered to subjects with BACs below 0.05 g/dl, which
arrested but generally did not reverse the decline. They achieved a mean BAC of about
0.04 g/dl 30 min. later and finished driving with about 0.035 g/dl. Thus, most of the subjects
performed the tests while their BACs fluctuated around 0.04 g/dl in a generally declining
trend from about 0.05 to 0.035 g/dl.
22

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
3.3
Road Tracking
Standard deviation of lateral position (SDLP) was the study's primary outcome variable.
Preliminary analyses of the SDLP data using the SAS General Linear Models Procedure
revealed no significant Period or Carryover effects (F5,75=1.58 & 1.09, respectively), thereby
allowing the main analysis to proceed as planned. The results are summarized in Table 3-3.
Meant SE SDLP values recorded in both repetitions within every treatment condition are
shown in Figure 3-1.
Table 3-3 Summary of MANOVA/ANOVA and Mean Pair Comparisons for SDLP
(for definition of treatment conditions, see Table 2-1).
MANOVA/ANOVA
EFFECT
F
df
p
Alcohol (A)
58.69
1,17
.000
THC: overall
15.48
2,16
.000
- Linear over doses
32.41
1,17
.000
- Quadratic over doses
0.96
1,17
ns
Repetitions (R)
10.49
1,17
.005
AxTHC: overall
1.59
2,16
ns
- Linear over doses
2.68
1,17
ns
- Quadratic over doses
0.87
1,17
ns
RxTHC: overall
0.04
2,16
ns
- Linear over doses
0.09
1,17
ns
- Quadratic over doses
0.30
1,17
ns
AxR
0.03
1,17
ns
AxRxTHC; overall
1.06
2,16
ns
- Linear over doses
1.06
1,17
ns
- Quadratic over doses
1.30
1,17
ns
PAIR COMPARISONS (df=1,85)
F
p
pa
OT1 vs. 00
7.91
.006
.025
OT2 vs. 00
13.46
.000
.0167
AO vs. 00
5.19
.025
.05
AT, vs. 00
30.21
.000
.0125
ATZ vs. 00
76.28
.000
.01
Subjects drove with the lowest mean SDLP after double placebo (i.e., in 00). The overall
effects of both Alcohol and THC were highly significant as was the linear increase in SDLP
over THC doses. Every drug treatment significantly elevated SDLP, relative to double
placebo, in separate mean-pair comparisons. The main effect of Repetitions was also
significant: subjects generally drove with higher SDLPs in the second test repetition than the
first. However, the interactive effects of Alcohol, THC and Repetition were uniformly not
significant.
23

*
Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
Subjects generally drove. with SDLPs below the established normal upper limit of 35.5 cm.
Two subjects (#11 and #17) exceeded the limit in both AT, and AT2. The first subject drove
with SDLPs of 40.3 and 40.4 cm and the second subject with 37.3 and 43.3 cm in these
conditions; i.e., in all cases well beyond the 99th percentile driver in the normal population.
35
32
29
E
a 26-
-J
23
20
*
17
Rep. 1
2
1
2.
1
2
1
2
.
1
2
1
2
Cond. 00
OT1
OT2
AO.
ATE
AT2
Figure 3-1
Mean (±SE) Standard Deviation of Lateral Position (SDLP, cm) in first and
second repetitions of the Road, Tracking Test in every condition (for definition of treatment
conditions, see Table 2-1).
Time out of lane (TOL) was a secondary but important measure of the subjects' road
tracking performance. TOL is a natural nonlinear correlate of SDLP. The former is known
to be less sensitive, to small drug effects but its rise with large ones has more obvious
practical implications. Results of the analysis of logio TOL are summarized in Table 3-4.
24

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
Table 3-4 Summary of MANOVA/ANOVA and Mean-Pair Comparisons for loglo
TOL (for definition of treatment conditions, see Table 2-1).
MANOVA/ANOVA
EFFECT
F
df
p
Alcohol (A)
17.08
1,17
.001
THC: overall
4.67
2,16
.025
- Linear over doses
9.40
1,17
.007
- Quadratic over doses
0.39
1,17
ns
Repetitions (R)
3.40
1,17
ns
AxTHC: overall
1.23
2,16
ns
- Linear over doses
1.89
1,17
ns
- Quadratic over doses
0.21
1,17
ns
RxTHC: overall
0.14
2,16
ns
- Linear over doses
0.00
1,17
ns
- Quadratic over doses
0.21
1,17
ns
AxR
0.35
1,17
ns
AxRxTHC; overall
0.35
2,16
ns
- Linear over doses
0.05
1,17
ns
- Quadratic over doses
0.56
1,17
ns
PAIR COMPARISONS (df=1,85)
F
P
Pa
OT1 vs. 00
0.06
ns
.05
OT2 vs. 00
3.20
ns
.0167
AO vs. 00
0.71
ns
.025
AT, vs. 00
6.70
.011
.0125
AT2 vs. 00
19.35
.000
.01
Geometric meant SE TOL is shown in Figure 3-2 for every condition and repetition within
conditions. Geometric values, or the antilogs of meant SE logio TOL, are, shown in the
figure since these better represent central tendencies when the raw data are positively
skewed; and, they reflect the mean differences that were actually tested for significance.
Most subjects (i.e., 11) occasionally allowed the vehicle's -lateral motion to exceed lane
boundaries while driving after placebo but the mean percentage of data recorded during
these excursions was very low (i.e., 0.26%). The overall effects of Alcohol and THC,
though not Repetitions, were significant. Mean-pair comparisons showed that the significant
main effects were mainly attributable to the drug combinations. Whereas neither alcohol
alone nor THC 100 µg/kg alone had appreciable effects, and THC 200 µg/kg alone had an
effect that only approached significance (P=0.077), the two combinations very significantly
elevated TOL. Alcohol plus THC 100 gg/kg caused mean TOL to rise above 0.6%, and
alcohol plus THC 200 µg/kg, to about 1.1%. Nevertheless, the interactive effect of alcohol
and THC was not significant.
25.

*
Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
gra
ph
Figure 3-2
Geometric mean (=SE) of Time out of Lane (TOL, %) in first and second
repetitions of the Road Tracking Test in every condition (for definition of treatment
conditions, see Table 2-1).
Standard deviation of speed (SDSP) was not significantly affected by any factor. Mean
lateral position (MLP) and mean speed (MSP), control variables for ascertaining whether
*
subjects followed their instructions, were similarly unaffected by treatments. Both showed
slight effects of Repetitions: on the average, MLP shifted from 8.23 to 10.03 cm to the right
of mid-line (F1,17=5.25; P=0.035) and MSP rose from 97.4 to 97.7 km/h (F1,17=3.84;
P=0.067). More importantly for control purposes, all individuals drove with MLPs between
30 cm left, and 41 cm right of mid-line and with MSPs between 91.2 and 101.8 km/hr. It
seems they generally attempted to drive with a steady lateral position near the center of the
traffic lane and a constant speed of 100 km/h (62 mph). .
26

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
3.4
Car Following
Table 3-5 summarizes the results oft-tests comparing the effects of placebo and every drug
treatment on car following parameters averaged separately over acceleration and
deceleration maneuvers. No treatment significantly affected any parameter during
acceleration maneuvers. Likewise, treatments failed to affect mean headway (HM) during
deceleration maneuvers. Mean values of HM varied irregularly between conditions from
41.9 m in OT, to 44.2 m in 00. The lack of any treatment effect on this parameter is
important. If drugs caused the subjects to maintain longer average headways, it would be
difficult to interpret differences between their effects and placebo's on the other parameters
measured in the test. And as indicated in the table, those differences were abundant during
deceleration maneuvers.
Table 3-5 Summary of t-test comparisons of drug and placebo effects on average RT, HSD and HmAx/Hm[N
during acceleration and deceleration maneuvers, separately. Values in the table are mean differences, t and
p. Asterisks indicate significant p-values according to adjusted p,, criteria (for definition of treatment
conditions, see Table 2-1).
ACCELERATION
RT (sec)
HSD (m)
HMAX (m)
Comparison
df
MD
t
p
MD
t
p
MD
t
p
OT, vs. 00
16
0.17
0.36
ns
1.70
2.36
.032
-0.09
0.04
ns
OT2 vs. 00
14
0.47
0.82
ns
1.65
1.79
ns
1.27
0.38
ns
AO vs. 00
14
0.60
1.08
ns
-0.12
0.15
ns
-3.68
1.31
ns
AT, vs. 00
15
0.16
0.29
ns
1.01
1.19
ns
-0.43
0.16
ns
AT2 vs. 00
15
0.85
2.06
ns
1.79
2.03
ns
0.98
0.28
ns
DECELERATION
RT (sec)
HSD (m)
HMAX (m)
Comparison
df
MD
t
p
MD
t
p
MD
t
p
OT, vs. 00
16
0.92
1.75
ns
1.25
2.85
.012*
-4.89
4.14
.001*
OT2 vs. 00
14
1.29
1.95
ns
1.96
3.76
.002*
-2.81
1.71
ns
AO vs. 00
14
0.51
1.07
ns
0.89
2.31
.036*
-4.07
2.91
.011*
AT, vs. 00
15
1.15
1.88
ns
1.86
2.51
.025*
-4.17
3.21
.006*
AT2 vs. 00
15
1.57
3.02
.009*
2.17
3.97
.001*
-3.41
3.07
.008*
Figure 3-3 shows mean±SE for RT, HSD and HMIN in every condition. Mean RT rose from
the placebo level after every drug treatment. The mean difference for AT2 was significant,
and for OT, , OT2 and AT, , nearly so (P<_0.10). All of the mean differences in HSD were
significant after pa adjustment for multiple comparisons. So were differences in HM N, except
that between 00 and OT2. Thus, in one, two or all three respects, every drug treatment
impaired car following performance relative to placebo.
27

*
Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
Figure '3-3 Mean (± SE) Reaction Time (RT, sec), Standard Deviation of Headway (HsD, m),
and Minimum Headway (H, m) during deceleration maneuvers in the Car Following Test in
every condition (for definition of treatment conditions, see Table 2-1).
28
*
*
VS -
2 33
s0
27
00
OT,
OT 2
AO
AT1
AT2

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
3.5
Intoxication Ratings
Subjects began the various conditions making estimates of their degrees of intoxication that
were reasonable considering the treatments given beforehand. Some at the beginning of the
double placebo condition thought they felt something and reported low levels of intoxication
(mean±SD, 7.67±2.37%). However, nearly all reported stronger feelings after alcohol and
both THC doses, given alone; i.e., 44.56±5.48, 29.11±4.20 and 36.50±7.10%, respectively.
Combinations of alcohol with low and high THC doses produced still higher intoxication
ratings; i.e., 52.89±4.66 and 62.87±4.90%, respectively. No subject felt normal after alcohol
alone or either combination of Alcohol and THC. Both of the latter produced extreme
ratings above 90%. In all conditions, mean intoxication ratings at the conclusion of testing
were at levels about half of where they began. As might be expected, both the overall effects
of alcohol and THC were highly significant (F1,17 & 2,16=76.04, 19.76; P50.001). The linear
THC dose effect was also significant (F1,17=41,97; P0.001). There was a significant Alcohol
x THC interaction (F2,16=10.07; P<_0.001). However, this finding is mitigated by the failure
to find a significant linear component of that interaction (F1,17=0.78). Instead, the quadratic
component was significant (F1,17=11.52; P<0.003). One can not interpret this interaction as
showing that the rise in feelings of intoxication was steeper over THC doses given with
alcohol. Rather it reflected the fact that the rise was precipitous from 00 to OTl and OT2
but more gradual from AO to AT1 and AT2.
3.6
Driving Quality Ratings
Subjects rated their driving quality at the end of every test repetition. Instructors rated the
subjects' performance in parallel. A summary of results from analyses comparing the
subjects' and instructors' ratings over treatment conditions and repetitions of tests within
conditions is given in Table 3-6. Mean±SE ratings by both are shown in Figure 3-4. Also
given are the frequencies of scores indicating that the subjects' driving quality was
unacceptable; i.e., that in their own or the instructor's opinion, they had "failed" the test.
Instructors rated the subjects' performance as significantly worse than the subjects did
themselves. The mean differences were not large in magnitude and otherwise the two sets of
ratings were quite similar. Ratings of the subjects' performance in the Road Tracking Test
clearly reflected the separate effects of alcohol and THC; and, THC's linear dose effect.
Somewhat surprisingly, those ratings did not show a separate significant effect of alcohol in
the Car Following Test. THC's effects and its increase with dosage were, however, also
apparent in this context. Both subjects and, instructors rated the subjects' performance as
generally worse in the first repetitions of both tests. The ratings showed a significant. Alcohol
.29

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
by THC interaction. But as with the interaction involving the intoxication ratings (above),
the quadratic but not the linear component was significant. Thus the interaction for driving
quality ratings must be interpreted in the same manner.
Table 3-6 Summary of MANOVA/ANOVA for Subjects and Instructor Ratings of Driving
Quality in Road Tracking and Car Following Tests.
EFFECT
ROAD TRACKING
CAR FOLLOWING
df
F
P
F
P
Rater (P)
1,17
16.95
.001
7.26
.015
Alcohol (A)
1,17
4.67
.045
1.23
ns
THC: overall
2,16
13.62
.000
7.61
.005
Linear over doses
1,17
24.79
.000
16.16
.001
Quadratic over doses
1,17
0.48
ns
0.05
ns
Repetitions
1,17
23.41
.000
14.47
.001
P x A
1,17
1.00
ns
0.05
ns
P x THC: overall
2,16
0.17
ns
0.89
ns
Linear over doses
1,17
0.27
ns
0.81
ns
Quadratic over doses
1,17
0.06
ns
1.41
ns
P X R
1,17
3.17
ns
1.43
ns
A X THC: overall
2,16
7.90
.004
5.04
.020
Linear over doses
1,17
0.06
ns
1.21
ns
Quadratic over doses
1,17
13.39
.002
10.54
.005
A x R
1,17
0.05
ns
0.17
ns
THC X R: overall
2,16
1.58
ns
0.00
ns
Linear over doses
1,17
0.04
ns
0.01
ns
Quadratic over doses
1,17
3.31
ns
0.00
ns
[2nd-order interactions and higher are omitted. None was significant]
"Failures" occurred more frequently in the instructors' ratings than the subjects'; and, with
about equal frequencies in both driving tests. According to the instructors, about half of the
subjects' driving was so poor that they failed in AT2 and about one-third in AT,. The failure
rate was lower and about the same in OT2 and OTC.
30

*
Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
10
9
8
7
PASS
6
FAIL
5
S:2 0
3
2
6
4
4
2
2
3
7
6
1:1 1
7
4
6 6
7
1
9 6
9
12
10
9
8
0
PASS
FAIL
*
5
S:0 0
6 5
8 5
3
2
5
4
7 5
## L. 2 2 8 2 8 5 5 3 10 5 12 9
4'
Rep. 1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Cond. 00
OT1
OT2
AO
AT1
AT2
Figure 3-4 Mean (+SE) ratings of driving performance in the Road Tracking (top) and Car
Following Test (bottom), in each treatment condition, as scored by the driving instructors (A)
and the subjects ('V). Also shown are the frequencies of subjects failing the particular test-
repetition according to themselves (S) and the instructors (I) (for definition of treatment
conditions, see Table 2-1).
31

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
3.7
Instructor's Comments
Table 3-7 summarizes the instructor's written comments concerning particularly unusual or
extreme aspects of the subjects' driving behavior in the various treatment conditions. Only
one (#11) drew any comment in the double placebo condition. At the other extreme, 10
subjects drew comments after being treated with the combination of alcohol and THC
200 tg/kg. Only three, all females (# 10, # 13, # 16), failed to elicit any comment.
Table 3-7 Summary of Instructor's Comments concerning unusually deviant driving behavior by subjects
within conditions. Males identified as subjects 01-09, females, as 10-18 (for definition of treatment
conditions, see Table 2-1).
CONDITIONS
COMMENTS
00
OT,
OT2
AO
AT,
AT2
Very drowsy & inattentive
11
11,14
5, 7,11
1
11, 17
1, 3, 11
Drifting & weaving
11
11
7,11
3,4
11,15
3,5,11,14,17
Swerving & overcorrecting
5,15
1,11,14,17
Speed too fast
11
17
Speed too slow
18
Speed too variable
11
11, 17
17
Car following: too close
11, 15
11, 15, 17, 18
8,11, 12
Car following: too far
3
2
9,11,17,18
8,14
Reckless
17
Memory loss
11
4, 6, 14
Attempted dangerous passing
11
14
11
11
# events
2
8
8
18
24
# subjects
1
4
5
5
10
The data presented in the table are self explanatory, except those in the last three categories.
One subject's (#17) behavior was described as reckless in AT2 because she drove at speeds
well above 100 km/h (62 mph) while weaving, swerving and abruptly overcorrecting. When
repeatedly cautioned by the instructor to maintain the designated speed, she immediately did
so but shortly resumed driving as before. Four subjects apparently experienced bizarre
memory disturbances, one (#11) in AT, and the others (#04, #06, #14) in AT2. Subject
#11's disturbance occurred in the Road Tracking Test. She began driving after the departure
of the other subject who was performing the Car Following Test. She eventually overtook
and proceeded to pass that subject's vehicle on the left, but failed to recognize it or the
leading vehicle under an investigator's control. She completed the maneuver by returning to
the right traffic lane between the vehicles engaged in this test. She was visibly surprised
when the instructor drew the error to her attention. Subjects' #04 and #06 memory lapses
were similar: midway through the Car Following Test, both forgot the procedure and
attempted to pass the leading vehicle. Another (#14) correctly followed the procedure
32

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
during the same test but upon its conclusion, failed to leave the highway with the leading
vehicle at the designated exit. She apparently would have continued to drive on the highway
beyond that point if not corrected by the instructor. Finally, subject #11 in OTI, ATI and
AT2, and subject #14 in OT2, had to be prevented from beginning a passing maneuver while
their vehicle was in the process of being overtaken by other traffic. It seemed to the
instructor that the subjects failed to inspect the rear-view mirrors before initiating these
maneuvers.
33

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
4.
DISCUSSION
Four studies preceded the present one in this series (Robbe & O'Hanlon, 1993). The first and
third are relevant to this discussion. The former involved 23 experienced THC users who
were allowed to continuously smoke marijuana cigarettes (THC, 2.57%) in a clinical
environment until arriving at their desired "high." The preferred mean dose was close to
300 µg/kg. A different group of 15 similarly experienced users completed the third study.
On separate occasions, they smoked marijuana-placebo and marijuana delivering THC 100,
200 and 300 µg/kg. The drug's effects on driving were assessed 55-170 min. post-dosing in
essentially the same manner as during the present study. No dose significantly affected this
group's car following performance but all elevated SDLP in the Road Tracking Test.
Relative to the placebo level, mean SDLP rose by 1.1, 1.8 and 2.9 cm in rough proportion to
the THC dose. Though all significant, these changes were very modest in comparison to
those produced by alcohol and a number of medicinal drugs in previous investigations.
Alcohol was used as the agent for calibrating the standard test (Louwerens et al, 1987).
Social drinkers performed it on five separate occasions while their BACs were controlled in
equal steps between 0.00 and 0.15 g/dl. The drinkers' mean SDLP rose exponentially with
BAC (R=0.99) and an empirical equation was derived for describing the relationship. The
equation has been subsequently used for describing drugs' effects on SDLP in terms of
respective BAC equivalencies. When we applied it for describing THC's effects in the earlier
study, the maximum mean change after 300 µg/kg was found to be the equivalent of
BAC=0.08 g/dl. THC's effects were also far less than those of some commonly used
medicinal drugs. For example, after a week of receiving diazepam 5 mg (Valium®), thrice
daily, and lorazepam 2 mg (Ativan®), twice daily, different groups of clinically anxious
patients drove with mean SDLPs that were respectively 7 and 10 cm higher than baseline
(Van Laar et al, 1992; O'Hanlon et al, 1995). Thus, we concluded that THC taken alone in
doses preferred by its users does not seriously affect driving performance.
We originally intended to administer the same THC doses, alone and in combination with
alcohol, in the present study. However, the results of a pilot study deterred us from using the
300 µg/kg dose. In combination with the specified alcohol dose, it rendered some subjects
incapable of standing much less driving. We therefore proceeded to administer only the two
lower doses, believing that these would be sufficient for determining the nature of THC's
interaction with alcohol.
Subjects who participated in this study differed in several important respects from the
predecessors. They were younger than the groups who defined the preferred dose and
completed the earlier driving study (22.7 years in the present versus 25.7 and 26.8 in the
previous studies); they had fewer years of driving experience (4.3 years versus 6.7 and 5.9
34

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
years); and, most importantly, their marijuana smoking frequency was less than half of either
preceding group's (2.3 versus 5.8 and 5.4 times per month). These differences should be
borne in mind while comparing the studies' results. One may reasonably assume that the
older, more frequent THC users had driven more often under the drug's influence, and there
is little doubt that the frequent use of any impairing drug fosters "behavioral tolerance" or
state-related and task-specific learning to compensate for its influence on performance
(review: Young and Goudie, 1994). Behavioral tolerance is unlike pharmacological
tolerance that either lowers a drug's circulating concentration or diminishes its activity at
receptor sites when taken continually in the same doses over days or weeks. Rather,
behavioral tolerance develops as the user practices the task while intoxicated on occasions
that can be widely separated in time. Given the present group's youth, limited driving
experience and low rate of THC use, it seems unlikely that many could have developed the
behavioral tolerance of the predecessors. Which group is more representative of THC users
in general is an open question. Probably neither is truly representative, both were drawn
from different bands in a very broad spectrum. If there is any distinction to be made, it is that
the present group comprised a sample of relatively inexperienced THC users who might be
especially vulnerable to the drug's impairing effects on driving.
These subjects' performance in the Road Tracking Test clearly showed the adverse effects of
alcohol and THC. Alcohol alone caused mean SDLP to rise by 2.2 cm over the placebo
level. That change was almost exactly as predicted from Louwerens et ads equation for
drivers operating with BAC=0.05 g/dl. Thus the present group demonstrated their normal
sensitivity to this impairing effect of alcohol on driving. Separate doses of 100 and
200 µg/kg caused mean SDLP to rise by 2.7 and 3.5 cm, respectively. These changes were
well above those shown after the same doses by the earlier group. Yet despite the absolute
differences, the increments in both groups' mean SDLPs as their doses increased from 100 to
200 µg/kg were practically the same; i.e., 0.8 and 0.7 cm, respectively. This suggests that
while the minimum dose for affecting the present group's driving performance was lower,
their dose-response was almost identical to the previous group's whose greater resistance to
THC's effect on driving performance could be the consequence of behavioral or
pharmacological tolerance, or both.
The effects of combined alcohol and THC on the present subjects' road tracking
performance were severe. Alcohol plus THC 100 and 200 µg/kg respectively elevated mean
SDLP by 5.3 and 8.5 cm. The former change was comparable to that predicted from
Louwerens et ads equation for driving with BAC=0.09 g/dl. The latter change was
equivalent to driving with BAC=0.14 g/dl. It has only been exceeded in all studies employing
the standard test by that occurring after lorazepam 2 mg (see above). Judging from SDLP,
35

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
the subjects' performance deteriorated more after both combinations than it would have if
they simply had driven after consuming enough alcohol to become legally intoxicated.
The subjects' progressive loss of control over the vehicle's lateral position as the drugs'
effects went from bad to worse first led to rising SDLP, and later, TOL. The relationship
between mean SDLP and TOL across both test repetitions in every condition is shown in
Figure 4-1. The function describing that relationship was derived from least-squares
regression analysis following an exponential model: TOL=0.00359e°-18491(sDLPI The model
was selected on the basis of a mathematical argument by Allen and O'Hanlon (1979). Those
authors showed that TOL must necessarily increase as an exponential function of SDLP so
long as drivers generally operate with a Gaussian distribution of lateral position around a
stable mean. In any case, the empirical equation adequately describes the data (R2=0.89). It
implies that the subjects' SDLPs could not have risen much further without a totally
unacceptable increase in TOL. As it was, while mean SDLP increased from the lowest to the
highest values in this study by 43%, mean TOL rose by 474%.
1.4
R=0.94
1.2
1.0
0.8
O0 0.6
0.4
0.2
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.01
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
SDLP (cm)
Figure 4-1 Geometric mean TOL as a function of mean SDLP across conditions: 00 ( ),
OT1 (0), OT2 (A), AO (0), AT1 (•), AT2 (A). (For definition of treatment conditions, see
Table 2-1.)
36

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
The exponential rise in TOL from conditions where alcohol and THC were separately
administered to those where they were given in combination suggests a synergistic
interaction. However, the statistical test failed to show a significant interaction between
alcohol and THC effects on TOL. But TOL was little affected by any treatment other than
the combinations. By taking the data from all conditions together into a single analysis, 2/3
of them mainly contributed error variance. Regardless of the additivity or multiplicity of the
drugs' effects, there can be no doubt that their combination is potentially very dangerous for
driving. Neither drug's doses in this study were particularly high and one may reasonably
suppose that drivers in the real world occasionally operate after consuming more of one or
both in combination. If they do, our results suggest that their increasingly large and frequent
excursions from the relative safety of a traffic lane would occupy a considerably greater
percentage of the distance traveled. This alone would increase the driver's risk of losing
control as the vehicle leaves the paved surface of the road, of striking a fixed object at
roadside or of swerving into the path of an approaching or overtaking vehicle. The risks of
all types of collisions could rise in parallel if, as is thought, the loss of lateral position control
is but one sign of general driving impairment.
An indication that the drugs' adverse influence on driving performance was pervasive came
from the Car Following Test. Despite missing data which necessitated an unparsimonious
and relatively weak analysis, its results supported those from the other driving test. Changes
in mean RT and HSD roughly paralleled those in mean SDLP. Performance after placebo was
always the best, and after the combination of alcohol and THC 200 pg/kg, always the worst.
THC dose effects, with and without alcohol were apparent for all performance measures.
Mean RT did not differ significantly after drug and placebo treatments, except in the worst
case. Yet those differences were large in practical terms. The difference due to the combined
effect of alcohol and THC 200 µg/kg was 1.6 sec. Since the average speed in that condition
was about 97 km/h (59 mph), this delay meant that the vehicle traveled, on the average, an
additional 42 m (139 ft) beyond the point where the subjects began to decelerate after
placebo treatment. Even the lowest THC dose, by itself, retarded the subjects' mean RT by
0.9 sec. In that case, they "only" drove an additional 24 m (78 ft) before beginning to
decelerate. It does not take much effort to imagine how response delays between 0.9 and
1.6 sec could affect safety in real car following.
The drugs' effect on mean HSD was clearer: that parameter was significantly affected by
every drug treatment. The changes in mean HSD reveal another adverse drug effect on
driving; i.e., diminished ability to perceive changes in the relative velocities of other vehicles
and/or diminished ability to adjust one's own vehicle's speed accordingly. They also indicate
a subtle hazard the drug user might pose for other drivers operating in traffic platoons
during high speed travel on highways. The changes from 00 to AT2 in this study were
about 2-m during both acceleration and deceleration maneuvers. Assuming a Gaussian
37

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
distribution of headway variance, this means that the subjects' total range of to and fro
oscillation increased by about 12 m (i.e., 6
AHSD) or 39 ft under the combined influence of
alcohol and THC 200 µg/kg. In real life, that abnormal headway variability would be
transmitted to and amplified by every driver/vehicle in retrograde succession (i.e., the
"accordion effect"). Unless succeeding drivers compensated by opening the gaps between
vehicles, one in the series would find it impossible to react quickly enough to avoid a
collision.
Despite the observed impairments, the subjects seemed well aware of their impairment in
both tests. Their self-ratings of driving quality varied over conditions in general agreement
with the objective measurements. The instructors rated their driving quality as even lower
but the differences in these assessments were not large. Some subjects, particularly after
THC 200 jig/kg alone or in combination with alcohol, indicated that they had failed the
tests. Why they continued to drive in these conditions is a good question. They probably
would not have proceeded, nor undertaken the tests in the first place, were it not for their
reliance on the instructors to prevent untoward consequences. Though reliance on the
instructor was definitely not encouraged, it may be an inevitable artifact of this experimental
approach. A further indication that participation in an experiment encouraged the subjects to
drive when they ordinarily would not may be taken from their previous histories. Whereas all
subjects admitted previously driving under the influence of THC, only three men said they
had done so after using alcohol and THC in combination.
Finally, something should be mentioned about the observers' comments. Though
unsystematic and probably biased by general knowledge of the subjects' treatments, these
supported the objective results and also revealed some idiosyncratic reactions that would
have otherwise gone undetected. In general, the subjects remained responsive to the
instructors' occasional corrections. Only one woman drove in a manner they considered
"reckless", and even she followed their instructions, if only briefly. Poor attention to the
driving task and deficient control over the vehicle's speed and lateral position were the most
frequently observed signs of the subjects' impairment. Memory disturbances afflicting four
subjects after combined drug treatments were the most dramatic. They suddenly failed to
recall what should have been very familiar test procedures. Many drugs, such as alcohol and
the benzodiazepines, interfere with the acquisition and/or later recall of information while the
drug is active in the brain. None of them is known to consistently prevent the recall of well
practiced procedures. That THC occasionally did so in this, our earlier studies, and one
other study (Yesavage, 1985), suggests that the drug may possess unique amnestic
properties. The phenomenon is worthy of further investigation.
38

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
5.
CONCLUSIONS
5.1
General Conclusions
In a previous series of studies on the effects of THC alone we concluded that THC given in
doses up to 300 µg/kg has "slight" effects on driving performance (Robbe & O'Hanlon,
1993). The results of the present study now compel us to revise that conclusion. The present
subjects' performance was more affected than their predecessors'. The present subjects
showed impaired car following performance after THC 100 jig/kg whereas the previous
ones were not impaired by doses up to 300 µg/kg. In the present study, road tracking
performance after 200 pg/kg was worse than the performance after 300 i.g/kg in the
previous study. We believe that these differences are attributable to the groups' respective
experience with THC smoking and to driving under the influence of THC. The present
group was less experienced and probably had not developed the same degree of behavioral
tolerance as their predecessors. Yet all of the individuals in both groups admitted to having
occasionally driven under the influence of THC before entering the studies. Thus, the new
data seem no less representative of how drivers normally operate under the influence of
THC. The addition of these data to those previously collected merely broadens the range of
reactions that might be expected to occur in real life. That range has not been shown to
extend into the area that can rightfully be regarded as dangerous or an obviously
unacceptable threat to public safety. Alcohol present in blood concentrations around the
legal limit (0.10 g/dl) in most American States is more impairing than anything subjects have
shown after THC alone in our studies. As mentioned, medicinal drugs have had worse
effects on psychiatric patients' driving performance in other studies employing the same test
procedures. If not blatantly dangerous, however, the effects of THC alone in this study were
certainly more than slight. They were of sufficient magnitude to warrant concern. Drivers
suffering the same degrees of impairment as the present subjects did after THC alone would
be less than normally able to avoid collisions if confronted with the sudden need for evasive
action. They would probably also be more likely to fall asleep during prolonged vehicle
operation. In short, while the effects of THC alone in doses up to 200 µg/kg might be
categorized as "moderate" in the tests, they could easily become "severe" under exceptional
circumstances.
The subjects' reactions to combined use of alcohol and THC are another matter. Drivers
suffering the same degrees of impairment as the present subjects did after THC and alcohol,
combined, would be exceedingly dangerous. Their impairment would be a serious threat to
their own safety, and perhaps to the general driving public as well. The simultaneous
consumption of low to moderate doses of alcohol and THC, rendered the present subjects
incapable of safe driving for several hours thereafter. That they were able to safely
39

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
demonstrate their impairment was, on occasion, only possible because of the instructor's
intervention. Had these individuals attempted to drive alone in that condition, it is quite
possible that one or more would have caused a collision.
5.2
Specific Conclusions
•
THC alone in 100-200 µg/kg doses impairs fundamental road tracking ability with the
degree of impairment increasing as a function of the dose.
•
The impairment from THC alone does not diminish and may even increase for up to 21/2
hours after marijuana smoking, regardless of the THC dose.
• THC in 100-200 µg/kg doses, in combination with alcohol sufficient for producing
BACAeO.04 g/dl, severely impairs road tracking ability with the degree of impairment
again increasing with the THC dose.
• THC and alcohol effects on road tracking ability appear to be additive in a
pharmacological sense, but the risk of driving off the road increases exponentially with
the combined drug effect.
•
THC alone in 100-200 µg/kg doses can impair the ability to maintain a constant headway
while attempting to match velocity with a preceding vehicle.
•
THC 200 pg/kg in combination with alcohol seriously retards reaction time to the
deceleration of a preceding vehicle.
• The effects of THC and alcohol on headway maintenance and reaction time also appear
to be additive but the sum in both cases can be large and potentially dangerous.
40

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
6.
REFERENCES
Allen RW, O'Hanlon JF (1979). Driver steering performance effects of roadway delineation
and visibility conditions. Proceedings of Transportation Research Board Annual
Meeting. (Washington DC) Paper No. 229.
Attwood DA, Williams RD, Bowser JS, McBurney LJ, Frecker RC (1981). The Effects of
Moderate Levels of Alcohol and Marijuana, Alone and in Combination on Closed-
Course Driving Performance. Tech Rep 81-RSU-17, Defense and Civil Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Downsview, Ontario.
Brookhuis KA, Volkerts ER, O'Hanlon JF (1987). The Effects of some anxiolytics on car-
following performance in real traffic. In: PC Noordzij, R Roszback (Eds.), Alcohol,
Drugs and Traffic Safety - T86, Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam, 223-226.
Budd RD, Muto JJ, Wong JK (1989). Drugs of abuse found in fatally injured drivers in Los
Angeles County. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 23, 153-158.
Casswell S (1979). Cannabis and Alcohol: Effects on closed-course driving behavior. In: I
Johnson (Ed.) Seventh International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic
Safety. Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 23-28.
Chesher GB (1986). The effects of alcohol and marijuana in combination: A review.
Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 2, 105-120.
Cimbura G, Warren RA, Bennett RC, Lucas DM, Simpson HM (1980). Drugs detected in
fatally injured drivers and pedestrians in the Province of Ontario. Traffic Injury
Research Foundation of Canada, Ottawa.
Cimbura G, Lucas DM, Bennett RC, Warren RA, Simpson HM (1982). Incidence and
toxicological aspects of drugs detected in 484 fatally injured drivers and pedestrians in
Ontario. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 27, 855-867.
Daldrup T, Reudenbach G, Kimm K (1987). Cannabis and Alkohol im Strassenverkehr.
Blutalkohol, 24, 144-156.
Donelson AC, Cimbura G, Bennett RC, Lucas DM (1985). The Ontario monitoring project:
Cannabis and alcohol use among drivers and pedestrians fatally injured in motor
vehicle accidents from March 1982 through July 1984. Traffic Injury Research
foundation of Canada, Ottawa.
Garriott JC, Di Maio VJM, Rodriguez RG (1986). Detection of cannabinoids in homicide
victims and motor vehicle fatalities. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 31, 1274-1282.
Louwerens JW, Gloerich ABM, De Vries G, Brookhuis KA, O'Hanlon JF (1987). The
relationship between drivers, blood alcohol concentration (BAC) and actual driving'
performance during high speed travel. In: PC Noordzij, R Roszbach (Eds.) Alcohol,
Drugs and Traffic Safety - T86, Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam, 183-192.
41

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
McLean S, Parsons RS, Chesterman RB, Dineen R, Johnson MG, Davies NW (1987).
Drugs, alcohol and road accidents in Tasmania. The Medical Journal of Australia,
147, 6-11.
O'Hanlon JF (1984). Driving performance under the influence of drugs: Rationale for, and
application of, a new test. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 18, 121S-129S.
O'Hanlon IF, Ramaekers JG (1995). Antihistamines and actual driving performance in a
standard test: A summary of Dutch experience, 1987-1994. Allergy, 50, 234-242.
O'Hanlon JF, Vermeeren A, Uiterwijk MMC, van Veggel LMA, Swijgman HF (1995).
Anxiolytics' effects on the actual driving performance of patients and healthy
volunteers
in
a
standardized
test:
An integration
of
three
studies.
Neuropsychobiology, 31, 81-88.
O'Hanlon IF, Brookhuis KA, Louwerens JW, Volkerts ER (1986). Performance testing as
part of drug registration. In: JF O'Hanlon, JJ de Gier (Eds.). Drugs and Driving,
Taylor & Francis: London, 311-330.
Overall JE, Rhoades HM (1985). Adjusting p values for multiple tests of significance. In:
HY Meltzer (Ed.) Psychopharmacology: The Third Generation of Progress, Raven
Press, New York, 1013-1018.
Peck RC, Biasotti A, Borland PN, Mallory C, Reeve V (1989).The effects of marijuana and
alcohol on actual driving performance. Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 2, 135-154.
Ramaekers JG, O'Hanlon JF (1994). Acrivastine, terfenadine and diphenhydramine effects
on several aspects of driving performance as a function of dose and time after dosing.
European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 47, 261-266.
Robbe HWJ (1994). Influence of Marijuana on Driving. Institute for Human Psycho­
pharmacology, University of Maastricht.
Robbe HWJ, O'Hanlon JF (1993). Marijuana and Actual Driving Performance, DOT HS
808 078, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, US Department of
Transportation, Washington D.C.
Smiley AM (1989). Marijuana: On-road and driving simulator studies. Alcohol, Drugs and
Driving, 2, 121-134.
Smiley AM, Noy YI, Tostowary KW (1987). The effects of marijuana alone and in
combination with alcohol on driving performance. In: PC Noordzij and R Roszbach
(Eds.) Alcohol Drugs and Traffic Safety - T86. Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam,
203-206.
Soderstrom CA, Trifillis AL, Shankar BS, Clark WE, Cowley RA (1988). Marijuana and
alcohol use among 1023 trauma patients. Archives of Surgery, 123, 733-737.
Stein AC, Allen RW, Cook ML, Karl RL (1983). A Simulator Study of the Combined
Effects of Alcohol and Marijuana on Driving Behavior. DOT HS 806 405, National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration. US Department of Transportation,
Washington D.C.
42

Marijuana /Alcohol Driving Study
Terhune KW (1982). The Role of Alcohol, Marijuana and Other Drugs in the Accidents of
Injured Drivers. Calspan Field Services Inc., Buffalo, New York. Tech. Rep. under
Contract No. DOT-HS-5-01179.
Terhune KW, Ippolito CA, Hendriks DL, Michalovic JG (1992). The Incidence and Role of
Drugs in Fatally Injured Drivers. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,
US Department of Transportation, Washington D.C. Final Rep under Contract No.
DTNH 22-88-C-07069
Van Laar MW, Volkerts ER, Willigenberg AAP (1992). Therapeutic effects and effects on
actual driving performance of chronically administered buspirone and diazepam in
anxious outpatients. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 12, 86-95.
Vuurman EFPM, Muntjewerff ND, Uiterwijk MMC, van Veggel LMA, Crevoisier C,
Haglund L, Kinsig M, O'Hanlon JF (1996). Effects of mefloquine alone and with
alcohol on psychomotor and driving performance. European Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 50, 475-482.
Williams AF, Peat MA, Crouch DJ, Wells JK, Finkle BS (1985). Drugs in fatally injured
young drivers. Public Health Reports, 100, 19-25.
Yesavage JE, Leirer VO, Denari M, Hollister LE (1985). Carry-over effects of marijuana
intoxication on aircraft pilot performance: a preliminary report. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 142, 1325-1329.
Young AM, Goudie AJ (1994). Adaptive processes regulating tolerance to behavioral
effects of drugs. In: FE Bloom, DJ Kupfer (Eds.) Psychopharmacology: The Fourth
Generation of Progress. Raven Press, New York.
43

DOT HS 808 939
July 1999