---
title: "nihms-118643"
source: "nihms-118643.pdf"
converted: "2026-01-25"
pages: 35
---

## Human Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics
Marilyn A. Huestis
Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
NIH, 5500 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21146, USA
### 1. Introduction
A multitude of roles for the endogenous cannabinoid system has been proposed by recent
research efforts. A large number of endogenous cannabinoid neurotransmitters or
endocannabinoids have been identified, and the CB-1 and CB-2 cannabinoid receptors have
been characterized. The presence of other receptors, transporters, and enzymes responsible for
the synthesis or metabolism of endocannabinoids are becoming known at an extraordinary
pace. The complex functions of this novel system have created multiple new targets for
pharmacotherapies. Research has focused on separating the behavioral psychoactive effects of
cannabinoid agonists from therapeutic effects. These efforts have been largely unsuccessful.
Another strategy centers on changing the pharmacokinetics of drug delivery to maximize
therapeutic effect and minimize cognitive and subjective drug effects. Development of oral,
rectal, and transdermal medications of synthetic Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)1) are
examples of this type of approach. Additionally, the potential therapeutic benefits of
administering unique combinations of cannabinoids and other chemicals present in the plant
Cannabis sativa is being investigated by the oromucosal route. There also is strong interest in
medications based on antagonizing endocannabinoid action.
© 2007 Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta AG, Zürich
phone: +1−410−550−2711; fax: +1−410−550−2971; e-mail: E-mail: mhuestis@intra.nida.nih.gov.
1Unless noted otherwise, THC always refers to the Δ9-variant.
# NIH Public Access
## Author Manuscript
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
Published in final edited form as:
Chem Biodivers. 2007 August ; 4(8): 1770–1804. doi:10.1002/cbdv.200790152.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We have shown that the cardiovascular and subjective effects of cannabis are blocked by
rimonabant, the first CB-1 cannabinoid-receptor antagonist, documenting that CB-1 receptors
mediate these effects of smoked cannabis in humans. It is clear that the endogenous cannabinoid
system plays a critical role in physiological and behavioral processes, and extensive research
effort is being devoted to the biology, chemistry, pharmacology, and toxicology of
cannabinoids.
Cannabis is one of the oldest and most commonly abused drugs in the world, and its use is
associated with pathological and behavioral toxicity. Thus, it is important to understand
cannabinoid pharmacokinetics and the disposition of cannabinoids into biological fluids and
tissues. Understanding the pharmacokinetics of a drug is essential to understanding the onset,
magnitude, and duration of its pharmacodynamic effects, maximizing therapeutic and
minimizing negative side effects.
Cannabinoid pharmacokinetics encompasses absorption after diverse routes of administration
and from different drug formulations, analyte distribution throughout the body, metabolism by
the liver and extra-hepatic tissues, and elimination in the feces, urine, sweat, oral fluid, and
hair. Pharmacokinetic processes are dynamic, may change over time, and may be affected by
the frequency and magnitude of drug exposure. The many contributions to our understanding
of cannabinoid pharmacokinetics from the 1970s and 1980s are reviewed, and the findings of
recent research expanding upon this knowledge are detailed. Cannabinoid pharmacokinetics
research is challenging due to low analyte concentrations, rapid and extensive metabolism, and
physico-chemical characteristics hindering the separation of drugs of interest from biological
matrices and from each other. Drug recovery is reduced due to adsorption of compounds of
Huestis
Page 2
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

interest to multiple surfaces. Much of the early cannabinoid data are based on radiolabeled
cannabinoids yielding highly sensitive, but less specific, measurement of individual
cannabinoid analytes. New extraction techniques and mass-spectrometric (MS) developments
now permit highly sensitive and specific measurement of cannabinoids in a wide variety of
biological matrices, improving our ability to characterize cannabinoid pharmacokinetics.
Cannabis sativa contains over 421 different chemical compounds, including over 60
cannabinoids [1-3]. Cannabinoid plant chemistry is far more complex than that of pure THC,
and different effects may be expected due to the presence of additional cannabinoids and other
chemicals. Eighteen different classes of chemicals, including nitrogenous compounds, amino
acids, hydrocarbons, carbohydrates, terpenes, and simple and fatty acids, contribute to the
known pharmacological and toxicological properties of cannabis. THC is usually present in
Cannabis plant material as a mixture of monocarboxylic acids, which readily and efficiently
decarboxylate upon heating. THC decomposes when exposed to air, heat, or light; exposure to
acid can oxidize the compound to cannabinol (CBN), a much less-potent cannabinoid. In
addition, cannabis plants dried in the sun release variable amounts of THC through
decarboxylation. During smoking, more than 2,000 compounds may be produced by pyrolysis.
The pharmacokinetics of THC, the primary psychoactive component of cannabis, its
metabolites ‘11-hydroxytetrahydrocannabinol’ (11-OH-THC) and ‘11-nor-9-carboxy-
tetrahydrocannabinol’ (THC-COOH)]2), and another cannabinoid present in high
concentration, cannabidiol (CBD), a non-psychoactive agent with an interesting array of
potential therapeutic indications, are included. Mechoulam et al. elucidated the structure of
THC in 1964, enabling studies of the drug's pharmacokinetics [4]. THC, containing no N-atom,
but with two stereogenic centers in a trans configuration, has been described by two different
atom-numbering systems, either the dibenzopyran (or Δ9) or the monoterpene (or Δ1) system.
In this review, the dibenzopyran (Δ9) system is employed.
### 2. Pharmacokinetics of Cannabinoids
2.1. Absorption
2.1.1. Smoking—Route of drug administration and drug formulation determine the rate of
drug absorption. Smoking, the principal route of cannabis administration, provides a rapid and
efficient method of drug delivery from the lungs to the brain, contributing to its abuse potential.
Intense pleasurable and strongly reinforcing effects may be produced due to almost immediate
drug exposure to the central nervous system (CNS). Slightly lower peak THC concentrations
are achieved after smoking as compared to intravenous administration [5]. Bioavailability
following the smoking route was reported as 2−56%, due in part to intra- and inter-subject
variability in smoking dynamics, which contributes to uncertainty in dose delivery [6-9]. The
number, duration, and spacing of puffs, hold time, and inhalation volume, or smoking
topography, greatly influences the degree of drug exposure [10-12]. Expectation of drug reward
also may affect smoking dynamics. Cami et al. noted that subjects were able to change their
method of smoking hashish cigarettes to obtain higher plasma concentrations of THC, when
they expected to receive active drug in comparison to placebo cigarettes [13].
A continuous blood-withdrawal pump, collecting blood at a rate of 5 ml/min, enabled capture
of the rapid THC absorption phase during smoking for the first time. Formation of 11-OH-
THC and THC-COOH was slower, and peak concentrations were much lower [14]. The
disposition of THC and its metabolites were followed for a period of 7 d after smoking a single
placebo, and cigarettes containing 1.75% or 3.55% of THC. The mean (±S.D.) THC
concentrations were 7.0±8.1 ng/ml and 18.1±12.0 ng/ml upon single inhalation of the low-dose
2Non-systematic compound names cited in the literature are used for the sake of clarity.
Huestis
Page 3
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(1.75% THC, ca. 16 mg) or the high-dose (3.55% THC, ca. 34 mg) cigarette, respectively, as
determined by gas-chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) [14]. THC, detected in
plasma immediately after the first cigarette puff (Fig. 1), was accompanied by the onset of
cannabinoid effects [15]. Concentrations increased rapidly, reaching mean peaks of 84.3 ng/
ml (range 50−129) and 162.2 ng/ml (range 76−267) for the above two cigarettes, respectively.
Peak concentrations occurred at 9.0 min, prior to initiation of the last puff sequence at 9.8 min.
Despite a computer-paced smoking procedure that controlled the number of puffs, length of
inhalation, hold time, and time between puffs, there were large inter-subject differences in
plasma THC concentrations due to differences in the depth of inhalation, as participants titrated
their THC dose (Fig. 2). The mean THC concentrations were ca. 60 and 20% of the peak
concentrations 15 and 30 min post smoking, respectively. Within 2 h, plasma THC
concentrations were ≤ 5 ng/ml. THC Detection windows (GC/MS detection limit 0.5 ng/ml)
varied from 3 to 12 h after smoking the low-dose (1.75% THC) cannabis cigarette, and from
6 to 27 h in the case of the high-dose (3.55% THC) cigarette.
Similar mean maximum THC concentrations were reported in specimens collected
immediately after cannabis smoking was completed. The mean peak THC concentrations were
94.3, 107.4, and 155.1 ng/ml after smoking single cigarettes of 1.32, 1.97, or 2.54% THC,
respectively [16]. Other reported peak THC concentrations ranged between 45.6 and 187.8 ng/
ml following smoking of a cigarette containing 1% of THC [17], and 33−118 ng/ml 3 min after
ad libitum smoking of a cigarette containing ca. 2% of THC [5]. The smoking route is preferred
by many cannabis users because of its rapid drug delivery and resultant fast onset of effects,
but also for the ability to titrate dose to the desired degree of effect. In our controlled smoked-
cannabis experiments described above, the individual with the lowest peak plasma
concentration had the greatest cardiovascular response [15].
The average concentrations in more than 30,000 cannabis preparations confiscated in the U.S.
between 1980 and 1997 were 3.1% THC and only 0.3% CBD [18]. However, cannabis-based
medicine extracts and clinical-grade cannabis contain high quantities of CBD, which frequently
equal the percentage of THC [19]. CBD may modify the effects of THC and reportedly may
inhibit cytochrome P450 (CYP 450)-mediated conversion of THC to 11-OH-THC [20][21],
although results are not always consistent across studies. The formation of THC from CBD
neither occurs by heat during smoking [22] nor by human metabolism.
2.1.2. Oral—There are fewer studies on the disposition of THC and its metabolites after oral
administration of cannabis as compared to the smoked route. THC is readily absorbed due to
its high octanol/water partition coefficient (P), estimated to be between 6,000 and over 9 ×
106, depending on the method of determination [23]. The advantages of cannabinoid smoking
are offset by the harmful effects of cannabinoid smoke; hence smoking is generally not
recommended for therapeutic applications. Synthetic THC, i.e., dronabinol (Marinol®)
preparations, are usually taken orally, but may also be administered rectally. In addition, abuse
of cannabis by the oral route also is common. Absorption is slower when cannabinoids are
ingested, with lower, more-delayed peak THC concentrations [24][25]. Dose, route of
administration, vehicle, and physiological factors such as absorption and rates of metabolism
and excretion can influence drug concentrations in circulation. Perez-Reyes et al. described
the efficacy of five different vehicles for oral administration of THC in gelatin capsules [26].
Glycocholate and sesame oil improved the bioavailability of oral THC; however, there was
considerable variability in peak concentrations and rates of absorption, even when the drug
was administered in the same vehicle. Oral THC bioavailability was reported to be 10−20%
by Wall et al. [27]. Participants were dosed with either 15 mg (women) or 20 mg (men) of THC
dissolved in sesame oil and contained in gelatin capsules. THC Plasma concentrations peaked
ca. 4−6 h after ingestion of 15−20 mg of THC in sesame oil. A percentage of the THC was
Huestis
Page 4
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

radiolabeled; however, investigators were unable to differentiate labeled THC from its labeled
metabolites. Thus, THC concentrations were overestimated.
Possibly a more accurate assessment of oral bioavailability of THC in plasma samples was
reported by Ohlsson et al., based on GC/MS experiments [5]. The peak THC concentrations
ranged from 4.4 to 11 ng/ml, occurring 1−5 h following ingestion of 20 mg of THC in a
chocolate cookie; the oral bioavailability was estimated to be 6%. Slow rates of absorption and
low THC concentrations occur after oral administration of THC or cannabis. Several factors
may account for the low oral bioavailability of 4−20% (as compared to intravenous drug
administration), including variable absorption, degradation of drug in the stomach, and
significant first-pass metabolism to active 11-OH-THC and inactive metabolites in the liver.
Currently, synthetic THC (Marinol®) is approved in the U.S.A. for reduction of nausea and
vomiting in cancer chemotherapy, and to increase appetite in HIV-wasting disease. Potential
new indications include the reduction of spasticity, analgesia, and as an agonist-replacement
pharmacotherapy for cannabis dependence. Thus, the pharmacokinetics of oral THC is of great
importance to the successful application of new therapeutic approaches. In a study of the plasma
concentrations of THC, 11-OH-THC, and THC-COOH in 17 volunteers upon intake of a single
Marinol® capsule (10 mg of THC), mean peak concentrations of 3.8 ng/ml of THC (range 1.1
−12.7 ng/ml), 3.4 ng/ml of 11-OH-THC (range 1.2−5.6 ng/ml), and 26 ng/ml of THC-COOH
(range 14−46 ng/ml) were found 1−2 h after ingestion [28]. Similar THC and 11-OH-THC
concentrations were observed with consistently higher THC-COOH concentrations.
Interestingly, two THC peaks frequently were observed due to enterohepatic circulation. Onset
is delayed, peak concentrations are lower, and duration of pharmacodynamic effects generally
are extended with a delayed return to baseline, when THC is administered by the oral as
compared to the smoked route [29][30].
In addition, THC-containing foods, i.e., hemp oil, beer, and other products, are commercially
available for oral consumption. Hemp oil is produced from cannabis seed, and is an excellent
source of essential amino acids and ω-linoleic and linolenic fatty acids. The THC content
depends upon the effectiveness of cannabis-seed-cleaning and oil-filtration processes. Hemp
oil with THC contents ≥ 300 and 1,500 mg/g were available in the U.S.A. and in Europe,
respectively. Currently, the THC concentrations of hemp oil in the U.S.A. are low, reflecting
the efforts of manufacturers to reduce the amount of THC in hemp-oil products.
In a recent, controlled cannabinoid-administration study of THC-containing hemp oils and
dronabinol, the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of oral THC were evaluated. Up to
14.8 mg of THC was ingested by six volunteers each day in three divided doses with meals for
five consecutive days [31][32]. There was a 10-d washout phase between each of the five dosing
sessions. THC was quantified in plasma by solid-phase extraction, followed by GC/MS
(positive-mode, chemical-ionization) analysis. THC and 11-OH-THC were rarely detected in
plasma following the two lowest doses (0.39 and 0.47 mg/d of THC), while, as shown in Fig.
3, peak plasma concentrations of less than 6.5 ng/ml of THC, <5.6 ng/ml of 11-OH-THC, and
<43.0 ng/ml of THC-COOH were found after the two highest THC doses (7.5 and 14.8 mg/
d). Interestingly, THC-COOH concentrations after THC administration at a dose of 7.5 mg/d
were greater than or equal to those after intake of the high-potency hemp-oil dose (14.8 mg/
d). This could be due to the formulation of dronabinol, which afforded greater protection from
degradation in the stomach due to encapsulation and perhaps, improved bioavailability of THC
in sesame oil, the formulation of synthetic THC or dronabinol. Plasma THC and 11-OH-THC
concentrations fell below the method's limits of quantification of 0.5 ng/ml by 25 h, while
THC-COOH was still measurable for more than 50 h after the last dose of the higher-
concentration hemp oils.
Huestis
Page 5
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

After oral THC dosing, Nadulski et al. reported generally higher THC-COOH concentrations
than those of THC almost immediately after dosing, in contrast to what is found after smoking
[33]. Concentrations of 11-OH-THC also were higher than those of THC, with an extended
detection window. These investigators suggest that ratios of [11-OH-THC]/[THC] >1 and >1.5
within and after 2 h after consumption, respectively, are strong indications for oral intake of
THC.
Due to low bioavailability of oral THC formulations, alternative routes of drug administration,
including oromucosal or sublingual dosing, vaporization of product and inhalation, and rectal
administration, have been developed to improve the amount of delivered cannabinoids.
2.1.3. Oromucosal—Due to the chemical complexity of cannabis plant material compared
to synthetic THC, extracts of cannabis that capture the full range of cannabinoids are being
explored as therapeutic medications. Cannabis has been used as medicine for thousands of
years [34][35]. Cultivation methods have been developed to reproducibly produce plants with
defined THC or CBD concentrations. GW Pharmaceuticals has produced two standardized
extract preparations, Tetranabinex®, which is high in THC, and Nabidiolex®, which is high
in CBD. Sativex® contains equal proportions of Tetranabinex® and Nabidiolex®, and, hence,
almost equal amounts of THC and CBD. THC and CBD represent approximately 70% of the
product, with 5% of other cannabinoids, the remainder being terpenoids, flavonoids, sterols,
alkanes, and other chemicals [36]. Clinical trials of the efficacy of these extracts are ongoing
for analgesia [37][38] and spasticity, and other indications in affected patients [39]. Sativex®
is administered sublingually to avoid first-pass metabolism by the liver. Sativex® is approved
in Canada for the treatment of neuropathic pain associated with multiple sclerosis, and in three
European countries for a number of indications.
2.1.4. Rectal—Several different suppository formulations were evaluated in monkeys to
determine the matrix that maximizes bioavailability and reduces first-pass metabolism [40]
[41]; THC-hemisuccinate provided the highest bioavailability of 13.5%. Brenneisen et al.
evaluated plasma THC concentrations in two patients who were prescribed THC-
hemisuccinate suppositories or Marinol® for spasticity [42]. THC did not accumulate in the
blood following 10−15 mg daily doses. THC concentrations peaked within 1−8 h after oral
administration, and ranged between 2.1 to 16.9 ng/ml. Rectal administration of 2.5−5 mg of
THC produced maximum plasma concentrations of 1.1−4.1 ng/ml within 2−8 h. The
bioavailability of the rectal route was approximately twice that of the oral route due to higher
absorption and lower first-pass metabolism.
2.1.5. Transcutaneous—Another route of cannabinoid exposure that avoids first-pass
metabolism and improves THC bioavailability is topical administration [43]. Cannabinoids are
highly hydrophobic, making transport across the aqueous layer of the skin the rate-limiting
step in the diffusion process [44][45]. In vitro diffusion studies may underestimate in vivo
transdermal flux [43]. After application of a dermal patch, mean steady-state plasma
concentration of Δ8-THC was 4.4 ng/ml within 1.4 h, and was maintained for at least 48 h.
Permeabilities of CBD and CBN were found to be 10-fold higher than for Δ8-THC. In vivo
studies of transdermal drug delivery in guinea pigs noted the presence of significant amounts
of plasma metabolites after topical application of THC [46]. Additional research is planned
with combinations of cannabinoids in EtOH to increase drug absorption.
Transdermal delivery of cannabinoids is hoped to reduce negative side effects seen with
inhalation dosing [47]. Transdermal delivery also bypasses first-pass metabolism of
cannabinoids. These properties could improve the utility of transdermal cannabinoid
medications. Applying a transdermal patch several hours before chemotherapy, and wearing
it for several days, would be a convenient means for treating associated nausea and vomiting.
Huestis
Page 6
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Also, wearing a patch for a week to stimulate appetite could be a good alternative to twice a
day oral dosing of dronabinol.
The drug-abuse potential of cannabinoid transdermal patches is expected to be low because of
slow delivery of THC to the brain. However, extraction of cannabinoids from the patch for
administration by a more-rapid method has not been evaluated. Diversion of fentanyl patches
by drug abusers for use in such a manner has been a significant problem.
2.1.6. Intravenous—Although THC is not abused by the intravenous route,
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic cannabinoid research has employed this technique.
Recently, D'Souza et al. administered THC intravenously to evaluate the association between
cannabinoids and psychosis [48]. The double-blind, randomized, and placebo-controlled study
investigated the behavioral, cognitive, and endocrine effects of 0, 2.5, and 5 mg of THC in
healthy individuals with a history of cannabis exposure, but never diagnosed with a cannabis-
abuse disorder. After 10 min, the plasma THC concentrations were 82±87.4 and 119.2±166.5
for intravenous doses of 2.5 and 5.0 mg, ng/ml respectively; the respective THC-COOH
concentrations were 43.8±26.1 and 81.9±47 ng/ml. Some subjects withdrew from the study
due to acute paranoia (1), panic (1), hypotension (2), withdrawal of consent due to dislike of
THC effects (3), and other issues (2). One subject experienced a significant, acute paranoid
reaction and was treated with 2 mg lorazepam. THC produced schizophrenia-like positive and
negative symptoms and euphoria, and altered aspects of cognitive function. Plasma cortisol
concentrations were not affected. THC produced a broad range of transient symptoms,
behaviors, and cognitive deficits in healthy individuals that resembled endogenous psychoses.
The investigators suggested that brain-cannabinoid-receptor function could be an important
factor in the pathophysiology of psychotic disorders.
2.1.7. Cannabidiol Absorption—Cannabidiol (CBD) is a natural, non-psychoactive [49]
[50] constituent of Cannabis sativa, but possesses pharmacological activity, which is explored
for therapeutic applications. CBD has been reported to be neuroprotective [51], analgesic
[37][38][52], sedating [37][38][53][54], anti-emetic [54], anti-spasmodic [55], and anti-
inflammatory [56]. In addition, it has been reported that CBD blocks anxiety produced by THC
[57], and may be useful in the treatment of autoimmune diseases [53]. CBD also has been
reported to decrease some of the side effects of THC [36]. These potential therapeutic
applications alone warrant investigation of CBD pharmacokinetics. Further, the controversy
over whether CBD alters the pharmacokinetics of THC in a clinically significant manner needs
to be resolved [58][59].
Ohlsson et al. reported CBD levels of 37−61 ng/ml (n=3, mean 48.4 ng/ml) 1 h after intravenous
injection of 20 mg of deuterium-labeled CBD, and of 3.0−17.8 ng/ml (n=3, mean 10.2 ng/ml)
1 h after smoking a cigarette containing 19.2 mg of deuterium-labeled CBD [60]. Average
bioavailability by the smoked route was 31 13% in five subjects, with a fourfold difference in
availability noted. Based on the area under the curve (AUC) for 72 h and the dose after
intravenous administration, a plasma clearance of 960−1560 ml/min was calculated. Agurell
et al. found 1.1−11 ng/ml of CBD 1 h after oral application of 40 mg of CBD (n=12, mean 5.5
ng/ml) in chocolate cookies [61]. Recently, Nadulski et al. reported CBD concentrations of
0.30−2.57 ng/ml (mean: 0.95 ng/ml) 1 h after oral intake of 5.4 mg of CBD [33]. CBD remained
detectable for 3−4 h after administration. The authors suggest that identification and
quantification of CBD could be an additional proof of cannabis exposure and could improve
interpretation of THC effects considering the potential ability of CBD to modify THC effects.
When comparing sublingual administration of THC (25 mg) alone vs. THC/CBD (25 mg each)
in cannabis-based medicinal extracts, no statistically significant differences in mean THC
maximum concentration, half-life, or AUC for THC and 11-OHTHC were observed [62]. The
Huestis
Page 7
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

only statistically significant difference was in the time of maximum THC concentration.
Despite administration of equivalent amounts of THC and CBD, lower plasma concentrations
of CBD were always observed. The pharmacokinetics of THC, 11-OH-THC, and CBD also
were evaluated after administration of 10 mg each of THC and CBD, either via the sublingual,
buccal, oromucosal, or oral routes [63]. All three analytes were detectable ca. 30 min after
dosing, with higher THC than CBD concentrations. 11-OH-THC generally exceeded THC
concentrations within 45 min of dosing. Mean maximum concentrations for THC, CBD, and
11-OH-THC were <5, <2, and <7 ng/ml, respectively, across all administration routes. High
intra- and inter-subject variability was noted.
2.2. Distribution
THC Plasma concentrations decrease rapidly after the end of smoking due to rapid distribution
into tissues and metabolism in the liver. THC is highly lipophilic and initially taken up by
tissues that are highly perfused, such as the lung, heart, brain, and liver. Tracer doses of
radioactive THC documented the large volume of distribution of THC and its slow elimination
from body stores. In animals, after intravenous administration of labeled THC, higher levels
of radioactivity were present in lung than in other tissues [64]. Studies of the distribution of
THC into brain are especially important for understanding the relationships between THC dose
and behavioral effects. After single intra-muscular administration of 14C-labeled Δ8-THC to
rats, maximal radioactivity was reached in brain after 2−4 h, representing 0.06% of the
administered dose [65]. Plasma concentrations were of similar magnitude to those measured
in men exposed to marihuana smoke. Kreuz and Axelrod were the first to describe the persistent
and preferential retention of radiolabeled THC in neutral fat after multiple doses, in contrast
to limited retention in brain [66]. The ratio of fat to brain THC concentration was approximately
21 : 1 after 7 d of consecutive exposure, and 64 : 1 after 27 d. Other investigators also found
that the amount of THC retained in the brain after administration of radiolabeled THC was less
than 1% of the administered dose [67][68]. With prolonged drug exposure, THC concentrates
in human fat, being retained for extended periods of time [69]. It is suggested that fatty acid
conjugates of THC and 11-OH-THC may be formed, increasing the stability of these
compounds in fat [70].
Distribution of THC into peripheral organs and the brain was found to be similar in THC-
tolerant vs. non-tolerant dogs [71]. In addition, these investigators found that tolerance to the
behavioral effects of THC in pigeons was not due to decreased uptake of cannabinoids into the
brain. Tolerance also was evaluated in humans. Hunt and Jones found that tolerance in humans
developed during oral administration of 30 mg of THC every 4 h, for 10−12 d [72]. Few
pharmacokinetic changes were noted during chronic administration, although average total
metabolic clearance and initial apparent volume of distribution increased from 605 to 977 ml/
min, and from 2.6 to 6.4 l/kg, respectively. Pharmacokinetic changes after chronic oral THC
administration could not account for observed behavioral and physiologic tolerance, suggesting
rather that tolerance was due to pharmacodynamic adaptation.
Adams and Martin studied the THC dose required to induce pharmacological effects in humans
[73]. They determined that 2−22 mg of THC must be present in a cannabis cigarette to deliver
0.2−4.4 mg of THC, based on 10−25% bioavailability for smoked THC. Only 1% of this dose
at peak concentration was found in the brain, indicating that only 2−44 μg of THC penetrates
to the brain.
In a recent, highly interesting study, Mura et al. analyzed paired blood and brain specimens in
12 postmortem cases for THC and THC-COOH, and also for 11-OH-THC, in two regular
cannabis smokers by GC/MS [74]. The THC concentrations in blood and brain ranged from
<0.2 to 11.5 ng/ml, and from 0.9 to 29.9 ng/g, respectively. There was no correlation between
blood and brain concentrations; brain levels were always higher than blood levels, and in three
Huestis
Page 8
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cases measurable drug concentrations remained in the brain, when no longer detectable in the
blood. In two additional cases, sufficient brain tissue was available to monitor THC, 11-OH-
THC, and THC-COOH concentrations in both blood and seven brain areas known to have high
concentrations of cannabinoid CB-1 receptors. THC, 11-OH-THC, and THC-COOH were
found in substantial concentrations in all brain areas, including locus niger, hippocampus,
occipital lobe, striatum-putamen-palladium, frontal lobe, spinal cord, and corpus callosum, the
order generally being THC≥THC-COOH>11-OH-THC. Blood concentrations were lower than
in the two-paired brains. The authors postulate that long-lasting effects of cannabis during
abstinence in heavy users may be due to residual THC and 11-OH-THC concentrations in the
brain. The consequences of THC-COOH in the brain remain unknown.
Storage of THC after chronic exposure could also contribute to observed toxicities in other
tissues. After single intramuscular administration of radioactive THC in rats, only 0.023% of
the original THC dose was found in testis, although total radioactivity in epididymal fat was
five- and eight times higher than that in the brain after 4 and 24 h, respectively [65]. After
multiple injections, concentrations of THC remained low in plasma, brain, and testis, not
exceeding 2−7 ng/g, but the epididymal-fat tracer concentration was 40 to 80 times higher.
The authors suggest that the blood–brain and blood–testicular barriers limit storage of THC in
brain and testis during acute exposure; however, during THC chronic exposure,
pharmacokinetic mechanisms are insufficient to prevent accumulation of THC in tissues, with
subsequent deregulation of cellular processes, including apoptosis of spermatogenic cells.
In one of the latest investigations on THC distribution in tissues, the large-white-pig model
was selected due to similarities with humans in drug biotransformation, including enzymes
and isoenzymes of drug biotransformation, size, feeding patterns, digestive physiology, dietary
habits, kidney structure and function, pulmonary vascular bed structure, coronary-artery
distribution, propensity to obesity, respiratory rates, and tidal volume [75]. THC Plasma
pharmacokinetics was found to be similar to those in humans. Eight pigs received 200 mg/kg
intra-jugular THC injections, and two pigs were sacrificed 30 min, 2, 6, and 24 h later. At 30
min, high THC concentrations were noted in lung, kidney, liver, and heart, with comparable
elimination kinetics in kidney, heart, spleen, muscle, and lung as observed in blood. The fastest
THC elimination was noted in liver, where concentrations fell below measurable levels by 6
h. Mean brain concentration was approximately twice the blood concentration at 30 min, with
highest levels in the cerebellum, and occipital and frontal cortex, and lowest concentrations in
the medulla oblongata. THC Concentrations decreased in brain tissue slower than in blood.
The slowest THC elimination was observed for fat tissue, where THC was still present at
substantial concentrations 24 h later. 11-OH-THC was only found at high concentrations in
the liver. The THC-COOH level was <5 ng/g in most tissues, except in bile, where it increased
for 24 h following THC injection. The authors suggest that the prolonged retention of THC in
brain and fat in heavy cannabis users is responsible for the prolonged detection of THC-COOH
in urine and cannabis-related flashbacks. The author of this review hypothesizes that this
residual THC may also contribute to cognitive deficits noted early during abstinence in chronic
cannabis users.
THC accumulation in the lung occurs because of high exposure from cannabis smoke, extensive
perfusion of the lung, and high uptake of basic compounds in lung tissue. Lung tissue is readily
available during postmortem analysis, and would be a good matrix for investigation of cannabis
exposure.
Metabolism of THC to 11-OH-THC, THC-COOH, and other analytes also contributes to the
reduction of THC in blood. Perez-Reyes et al. compared the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of tritiated THC and 11-OH-THC in 20 male volunteers [76]. Although
equal doses produced equal psychoactive effects, drug effects were perceived more rapidly
Huestis
Page 9
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

after exposure to 11-OH-THC than to THC. In addition, 11-OH-THC left the intravascular
compartment faster than THC. These data suggest that 11-OH-THC diffuses into the brain
more readily than THC does. Other possible explanations include lower plasma-protein binding
of 11-OH-THC or enhanced crossing of the blood–brain barrier by the hydroxylated
metabolite.
The distribution volume (Vd) of THC is large, ca. 10 l/kg, despite the fact that it is 95−99%
protein-bound in plasma, primarily to lipoproteins [72][77]. Protein-binding values for THC-
COOH and THC-COOH glucuronide were similar to those of THC proper (ca. 97%) [78].
More recently, with the benefit of advanced analytical techniques, the steady state Vd value of
THC was estimated to be 3.4 l/kg [70]. THC-COOH was found to be far less lipophilic than
the parent drug, whose partition coefficient P value at neutral pH has been measured at 6,000
(or higher), and more lipophilic than the glucuronide [78]. The fraction of THC glucuronide
present in blood after different routes of administration has not been adequately resolved, but,
recently, the partition coefficient of this compound indicated an unexpectedly high
lipophilicity, ca. 18 at pH 7.4.
THC rapidly crosses the placenta, although concentrations were lower in canine and ovine fetal
blood and tissues than in maternal plasma and tissues [79]. The metabolites 11-OH-THC and
THC-COOH crossed the placenta much less efficiently [80][81]. No THC-COOH was detected
in fetal plasma and tissues, indicating a lack of transfer across the placenta, and a lack of
metabolism of THC in fetal monkey [80]. Blackard and Tennes reported that THC in cord
blood was three to six times less than in maternal blood [82]. Transfer of THC to the fetus was
greater in early pregnancy. THC also concentrates into breast milk from maternal plasma due
to its high lipophilicity [83][84]. THC Concentration in breast milk was 8.4 times higher than
in plasma in one woman, yielding a daily THC exposure to the infant of 0.01 to 0.1 mg/d,
assuming that the mother smokes one to two cannabis cigarettes each day [84].
2.3. Metabolism
2.3.1. Hepatic Metabolism—Burstein and co-workers were the first to show that 11-OH-
THC and THC-COOH are primary metabolites of THC in rabbits and rhesus monkeys
[85-87]. They also documented that THC can be metabolized in the brain. Harvey et al.
monitored the metabolism of THC, CBD, and CBN in mice, rats, and guinea pigs, and found
extensive metabolism, but with inter-species variation [88]. Phase-I oxidation reactions of THC
include allylic and aliphatic hydroxylations, oxidation of alcohols to ketones and acids, β-
oxidation, and degradation of the pentyl side chain. Conjugation with glucuronic acid is a
common Phase-II reaction. 11-OH-THC was the primary metabolite in all three species,
followed by 8α-OH-THC in the mouse and rat, and 8β-OH-THC in guinea pig. Side-chain
hydroxylation was common in all three species. THC-COOH concentrations were higher in
the mouse and rat, while THC-COOH glucuronide concentrations predominated in the guinea
pig. THC Concentrations accumulated in the liver, lung, heart, and spleen.
Hydroxylation of THC at C(9) by the hepatic CYP 450 enzyme system leads to production of
the equipotent metabolite 11-OH-THC [89][90], originally thought by early investigators to
be the true psychoactive analyte [64]. CYP 450 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4 are involved in the
oxidation of THC [90]. More than 100 THC metabolites, including di- and trihydroxy
compounds, ketones, aldehydes, and carboxylic acids, have been identified [21][70][91].
Although 11-OH-THC predominates as the first oxidation product, significant amounts of
8β-OH-THC and lower amounts of the 8α-OH-THC are formed. Much lower plasma 11-OH-
THC concentrations (ca. 10% of THC concentrations) are found after cannabis smoking than
after oral administration [27]. Peak 11-OH-THC concentrations occurred ca. 13 min after the
start of smoking [14]. Bornheim et al. reported that 11-OH-THC and 8β-OH-THC were formed
at the same rate in human-liver microsomes, with smaller amounts of
Huestis
Page 10
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

‘epoxyhexahydrocannabinol’, 8α-OH-THC, and 8-keto-THC [92]. CYP 450 2C9 is thought to
be primarily responsible for the formation of 11-OH-THC, whereas CYP 450 3A catalyzes the
formation of 8β-OH-THC, ‘epoxyhexahydrocannabinol’, and other minor metabolites. Less
than fivefold variability in 2C9 rates of activity was observed, while much higher variability
was noted for the 3A enzyme. Dihydroxylation of THC yields 8β,11-di-OH-THC. Excretion
of 8β,11-di-OH-THC in urine was reported to be a good biomarker for recent cannabis use
[93].
Oxidation of the psychoactive 11-OH-THC produces the inactive metabolite THC-COOH
[64][94]. THC-COOH and its glucuronide conjugate are the major end products of
biotransformation in most species, including man [91][95]. THC-COOH concentrations
gradually increase, and are greater than THC concentrations 30−45 min after the end of
smoking [96]. After ingestion of a single oral dose of Marinol® (10 mg THC), plasma THC-
COOH concentrations were higher than those of THC and 11-OH-THC as early as 1 h after
dosing [97]. Unlike after smoking, THC and 11-OH-THC concentrations are similar after oral
THC administration.
Phase-II metabolism of THC-COOH involves addition of glucuronic acid, and, less commonly,
of sulfate, glutathione, amino acids, and fatty acids via the 11-COOH group. The phenolic OH
group may be a target as well. It is also possible to have two glucuronic acid moieties attached
to THC-COOH, although steric hindrance at the phenolic OH group could be a factor. Addition
of the glucuronide group improves water solubility, facilitating excretion, but renal clearance
of these polar metabolites is low due to extensive protein binding [72]. No significant
differences in metabolism between men and women have been reported [27].
After the initial distribution phase, the rate-limiting step in the metabolism of THC is its
redistribution from lipid depots into blood [98]. Lemberger et al. suggested that frequent
cannabis smoking could induce THC metabolism [99]. However, later studies did not
corroborate this finding [8][91].
More than 30 metabolites of CBD were identified in urine, with hydroxylation of the 7-Me
group and subsequent oxidation to the corresponding carboxylic acid as the main metabolic
route, in analogy to THC [100].
2.3.2. Extrahepatic Metabolism—Other tissues, including brain, intestine, and lung, may
contribute to the metabolism of THC, although alternate hydroxylation pathways may be more
prominent [86][101-104]. An extrahepatic metabolic site should be suspected whenever total
body clearance exceeds blood flow to the liver, or when severe liver dysfunction does not affect
metabolic clearance [102]. Of the ten mammalian classes of CYP 450 systems, the cytochrome
families 1−4 primarily metabolize xenobiotics, which are found in the liver, small intestine,
peripheral blood, bone marrow, and mast cells in decreasing concentrations, with the lowest
concentrations in the brain, pancreas, gall bladder, kidney, skin, salivary glands, and testes.
Within the brain, higher concentrations of CYP 450 enzymes are found in the brain stem and
cerebellum [102]. The hydrolyzing enzymes – non-specific esterases, β-glucuronidases, and
sulphatases–are primarily found in the gastrointestinal tract. Side-chain hydroxylation of THC
is prominent in THC metabolism by the lung. Metabolism of THC by fresh biopsies of human
intestinal mucosa yielded polar hydroxylated metabolites that directly correlated with time and
amount of intestinal tissue [101].
In a study of the metabolism of THC in the brains of mice, rats, guinea pigs, and rabbits,
Watanabe et al. found that brain microsomes oxidized THC to monohydroxylated metabolites
[103]. Hydroxylation of C(4) of the pentyl side chain produced the most common THC
Huestis
Page 11
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

metabolite in the brains of these animals, similar to THC metabolites produced in the lung.
These metabolites are pharmacologically active, but their relative activity is unknown.
2.3.3. Metabolism of Cannabidiol—CBD Metabolism is similar to that of THC, with
primary oxidation of C(9) to the alcohol and carboxylic acid [8][100], as well as side-chain
oxidation [88][100]. Like THC, CBD is subjected to a significant first-pass effect; however,
unlike THC, a large proportion of the dose is excreted unchanged in the feces [105]. Benowitz
et al. reported that CBD is an in vitro inhibitor of liver microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes,
inhibiting hexobarbital metabolism in humans [50]. Others have reported that CBD selectively
inhibits THC-metabolite formation in vitro [58]. Hunt et al. reported that the pharmacokinetics
of THC were not affected by CBD, except for a slight slowing of the metabolism of 11-OH-
THC to THC-COOH [106]. Co-administration of CBD did not significantly affect the total
clearance, volume of distribution, and terminal elimination half-lives of THC metabolites.
Concentration vs. time curves, and ratios of the maximum average concentration and AUC
values for 11-OH-THC/THC, THC-COOH/THC, and THC-COOH/11-OH-THC showed that
CBD only partially inhibited the hydroxylation of THC to 11-OH-THC catalyzed by CYP 2C,
when data were compared after oral administration of THC alone, as compared to a THC and
CBD preparation [107]. THC and CBD concentrations are high in the liver after oral
administration, and there is high first-pass metabolism of THC. However, the effect of CBD
on hydroxylation of THC was small in comparison to overall variability.
2.4. Elimination
Within 5 d, a total of 80−90% of THC is excreted, mostly as hydroxylated and carboxylated
metabolites [21][95]. More than 65% is excreted in the feces, ca. 20% being eliminated in the
urine [27]. Numerous acidic metabolites are found in the urine, many of which are conjugated
with glucuronic acid to increase their water solubility. The primary urinary metabolite is the
acid-linked THC-COOH glucuronide conjugate [108], while 11-OH-THC predominates in the
feces [21]. The concentration of free THC-COOH, and the cross-reactivity of glucuronide-
bound THC-COOH enable cannabinoid immunoassays to be performed directly on non-
hydrolyzed urine, but confirmation and quantification of THC-COOH is usually performed
after alkaline hydrolysis or β-glucuronidase hydrolysis to free THC-COOH for measurement
by GC/MS. It was initially thought that little or no THC and 11-OH-THC were excreted in the
urine.
2.4.1. Terminal Elimination Half-Lives of THC-COOH—Another common problem
with studying the pharmacokinetics of cannabinoids in humans is the need for highly sensitive
procedures to measure low cannabinoid concentrations in the terminal phase of excretion, and
the requirement for monitoring plasma concentrations over an extended period to adequately
determine cannabinoid half-lives. Many studies utilized short sampling intervals of 24−72 h
that underestimate terminal THC and THC-COOH half-lives. The slow release of THC from
lipid-storage compartments and significant enterohepatic circulation contribute to a long
terminal half-life of THC in plasma, reported to be greater than 4.1 d in chronic cannabis users
[109]. Isotopically labeled THC and sensitive analytical procedures were used to obtain this
drug half-life. Garrett and Hunt reported that 10−15% of the THC dose is enterohepatically
circulated in dogs [98]. Johansson et al. reported a THC-COOH plasma-elimination half-life
of up to 12.6 d in a chronic cannabis user, when monitoring THC-COOH concentrations over
four weeks [110]. Mean plasma THC-COOH elimination half-lives were 5.2±0.8 and 6.2±6.7
d for frequent and infrequent cannabis users, respectively. Similarly, when sensitive analytical
procedures and sufficient sampling periods were employed for determining the terminal urinary
excretion half-life of THC-COOH, it was estimated to 3−4 d [111]. Urinary THC-COOH
concentrations drop rapidly until reaching a value of ca. 20−50 ng/ml, and then decrease at a
Huestis
Page 12
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

much slower rate. No significant pharmacokinetic differences between chronic and occasional
users have been substantiated [112].
2.4.2. Percentage of THC Excreted as Urinary THC-COOH—An average of 93.9±24.5
mg of THC-COOH (range 34.6−171.6 μg) was measured in urine over a period of 7 d, following
smoking of a single cannabis cigarette containing ca. 18 mg (1.75%) of THC [113]. The average
amount of THC-COOH excreted in the same time period following the high dose (3.55% THC
cigarette, ca. 34 mg THC) was 197.4±33.6 μg (range 107.5−305.0 μg). This represents an
average of only 0.54±0.14 and 0.53±0.09% of the original amount of THC in the low- and
high-dose cigarettes, respectively. These small percentages of the total THC dose found in the
urine as THC-COOH are not surprising, considering the many factors that influence THC-
COOH excretion after smoking. Prior to harvesting, cannabis plant material contains little
active THC. When smoked, THC carboxylic acids spontaneously decarboxylate to produce
THC, with nearly complete conversion upon heating. Pyrolysis of THC during smoking
destroys additional drug. Drug availability is further reduced by loss of drug in the side-stream
smoke and drug remaining in the unsmoked cigarette butt. These factors contribute to high
variability in drug delivery by the smoked route. It is estimated that the systemic availability
of smoked THC is ca. 8−24%, and that bioavailability depends strongly upon the experience
of the cannabis users [5][17][114]. THC Bioavailability is reduced due to the combined effect
of these factors; the actual available dose is much lower than the amount of THC and THC
precursor present in the cigarette. Most of the THC dose is excreted in the feces (30−65%),
rather than in the urine (20%) [27][115]. Another factor affecting the low amount of recovered
dose is measurement of a single metabolite. However, numerous cannabinoid metabolites are
produced in humans as a result of THC metabolism, most of which are not detected or included
in the calculations based on GC/MS analysis.
Following controlled oral administration of THC in dronabinol or hemp oil, urinary
cannabinoid excretion was characterized in 4,381 urine specimens [116][117]. THC Doses of
0.39−14.8 mg/d (from hemp oils or Marinol®) were administered for 5 d. All urine voids,
collected over ten weeks, were tested by immunoassay and GC/MS analysis. With the U.S.
federally mandated 50 μg/l immunoassay cutoff, and during ingestion of the two low doses
typical of current hemp-oil THC concentrations (<0.5 mg/d), mean detection rates were below
0.2% [116]. The two high doses (7.5 and 14.8 mg/d) produced mean detection rates of 23−46%,
with intermittent positive tests up to 118 h. Maximum THC-COOH concentrations were 5.4
−38.2 ng/ml for the low, and 19.0−436 μg/l for the high doses. The availability of cannabinoid-
containing foodstuffs, cannabinoid-based therapeutics, and continued abuse of oral cannabis
require scientific data for the accurate interpretation of cannabinoid tests. These data
demonstrate that it is possible, but unlikely, for a urine specimen to test positive at the federally
mandated cannabinoid cutoffs, following manufacturer's dosing recommendations for the
ingestion of hemp oils of low THC concentration. Urine tests have a high likelihood of being
positive following Marinol® therapy.
These investigators also reported no significant differences (P≤0.05) in mean time of maximum
excretion rate, mean maximum excretion rate, and mean terminal elimination half-life between
the four THC doses (0.39−14.8 mg/d), with ranges of 67.4−94.9 h, 0.9−16.3 μg/h, and 44.2
−64.0 h, respectively [117]. Mean apparent elimination half-lives (t1/2) of 24.1±7.8 and 21.1
±4.3 h for the low (7.5 mg/d) and high (14.8 mg/d) doses, respectively, were calculated from
the excretion-rate curve prior to the last urine sample, with a THC-COOH concentration ≥15
ng/ml. An average of only 2.9±1.6%, 2.5±2.7%, 1.5±1.4%, and 0.6±0.5% of the THC in the
dose of 0.39, 0.47, 7.5, and 14.8 mg/d, respectively, was excreted in the form of THC-COOH
in the urine over each dosing session (14 d). This study demonstrated that the terminal urinary
elimination half-life of THC-COOH following oral administration is ca. 2−3 d for doses
ranging from 0.39−14.8 mg/d. These data also demonstrate that the apparent THC-COOH
Huestis
Page 13
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

urinary elimination half-life, prior to reaching a concentration of 15 ng/ml, is significantly
shorter than the terminal urinary elimination half-life.
2.4.3. Cannabinoid–Glucuronide Conjugates—Specimen preparation for cannabinoid
testing frequently includes a hydrolysis step to free cannabinoids from their glucuronide
conjugates. Most GC/MS procedures of urine samples measure total THC-COOH, following
either an enzymatic hydrolysis with β-glucuronidase or, more commonly, an alkaline
hydrolysis with NaOH. Alkaline hydrolysis appears to efficiently hydrolyze the ester
glucuronide linkage.
2.4.4. Urinary Biomarkers of Recent Cannabis Use—Significantly higher
concentrations of THC and 11-OH-THC in urine are observed, when Escherichia coli β-
glucuronidase is used in the hydrolysis method, compared to either β-glucuronidase from Helix
pomatia or base treatment [118][119]. THC and 11-OH-THC primarily are excreted in urine
as glucuronide conjugates that are resistant to cleavage by alkaline hydrolysis or by enzymatic
hydrolysis employing some types of β-glucuronidase. Kemp et al. demonstrated that β-
glucuronidase from E. coli was needed to hydrolyze the ether glucuronide linkages of the active
cannabinoid analytes. Mean THC concentrations in urine specimens from seven subjects,
collected after each had smoked a single marijuana cigarette (3.58% of THC), was 22 ng/ml,
when the E. coli β-glucuronidase hydrolysis method was used; in contrast, the observed THC
concentrations were nearly zero when using either H. pomatia β-glucuronidase or base
hydrolysis [118][119]. Similar differences were found for 11-OH-THC, with a mean
concentration of 72 ng/ml for the E. coli method, but concentrations <10 ng/ml for the other
methods. The authors suggested that finding THC and/or 11-OH-THC in the urine might
provide a reliable marker of recent cannabis use, but adequate data from controlled drug-
administration studies were not yet available to support or refute this observation. Using a
modified analytical method with E. coli β-glucuronidase, we have analyzed hundreds of urine
specimens collected after controlled THC administration. We found that 11-OH-THC may be
excreted in the urine of chronic cannabis users for a much longer period of time, beyond the
period of pharmacodynamic effects and performance impairment. Additional research is
necessary to determine the validity of estimating time of cannabis use from THC and 11-OH-
THC concentrations in urine.
### 3. Interpretation of Cannabinoid Concentrations in Biological Fluids
3.1. Plasma Concentrations
Compared to other drugs of abuse, analysis of cannabinoids presents some difficult challenges.
THC and 11-OH-THC are highly lipophilic, and present in low concentrations in body fluids.
Complex specimen matrices, i.e., blood, sweat, or hair, may require multi-step extractions to
separate cannabinoids from endogenous lipids and proteins. Care must be taken to avoid low
recoveries of cannabinoids due to their high affinity to glass and plastic containers, and to
alternate matrix-collection devices [120-123]. THC and THC-COOH are predominantly found
in the plasma fraction of blood, where 95−99% are bound to lipoproteins. Only ca. 10% of
either compound is found in the erythrocytes [124]. Whole-blood cannabinoid concentrations
are approximately one-half the concentrations found in plasma specimens, due to the low
partition coefficient of drug into erythrocytes [96][125][126].
3.1.1. Intravenous THC Administration—Kelly et al. intravenously administered 5 mg
of THC to eight males, and then periodically monitored THC, THC-COOH, and THC-COOH–
glucuronide conjugates by GC/MS (1 ng/ml detection limit for THC and THC-COOH) in
plasma with and without alkaline hydrolysis for up to 10 h, and then once daily for up to 12 d
[77]. The elimination half-lives of THC, THC-COOH, and THC-COOH–glucuronide
Huestis
Page 14
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

conjugate in the plasma of frequent cannabis users were 116.8 min, 5.2 d, and 6.8 d,
respectively, and 93.3 min, 6.2 d, and 3.7 d in infrequent users. Conjugated THC-COOH was
detected in the plasma of 75% of the frequent and 25% of the infrequent users after 12 d.
3.1.2. Smoked Cannabis—THC Detection times in plasma of 3.5−5.5 h were reported in
individuals who smoked two cannabis cigarettes containing a total of ca. 10 mg of THC (GC/
MS detection limit 0.8 ng/ml) [93], and up to 13 d for deuterated THC in the blood of chronic
cannabis users, who smoked four cigarettes containing deuterium-labeled THC (GC/MS
detection limit 0.02 ng/ml) [109]. In the latter study, the terminal half-life of THC in plasma
was determined to be ca. 4.1 d, as compared to frequent estimates of 24−36 h in several other
studies [27][59][127] that lacked the sensitivity and the lengthy monitoring window of the
radiolabeled protocol.
Few controlled drug-administration studies have monitored active 11-OH-THC plasma
concentrations. Huestis et al. found plasma 11-OH-THC concentrations to be ca. 6−10% of
the concurrent THC concentrations for up to 45 min after the start of smoking [14]. Mean peak
11-OH-THC concentrations occurred 13.5 min (range 9.0−22.8 min) after the start of smoking,
and were 6.7 ng/ml (range 3.3−10.4 ng/ml) and 7.5 ng/ml (range 3.8−16 ng/ml) after smoking
one cannabis cigarette containing 1.75 or 3.55% of THC, respectively. The concentrations of
11-OH-THC decreased gradually, with mean detection times of 4.5 and 11.2 h after the two
doses.
The concentrations of THC-COOH were monitored in human plasma for 7 d after controlled
cannabis smoking [14]. This inactive metabolite was detected in the plasma of all subjects by
8 min after the start of smoking. THC-COOH concentrations in plasma increased slowly, and
reached a plateau for up to 4 h. Peak concentrations were consistently lower than peak THC
concentrations, but were higher than 11-OH-THC peak concentrations. Mean peak THC-
COOH concentrations were 24.5 ng/ml (range 15−54 ng/ml) and 54.0 ng/ml (range 22−101
ng/ml) after smoking the low- (1.75% of THC) or high-dose (3.55% of THC) cigarette,
respectively. Following smoking of the lower dose, THC-COOH was detected from 48−168
h, with a mean of 84 h. Detection times ranged from 72−168 h, with a mean of 152 h, following
smoking of the higher dose. The time course of detection of THC-COOH is much longer than
either that of THC or 11-OH-THC. The AUC for the mean data from 0−168 h was 36.5 and
72.2 ng × h/ml, respectively, for the low- and high-dose conditions, demonstrating a dose-
response relationship for the mean data [14]. Fig. 2 (see above) shows individual THC-
concentration time profiles for six subjects, demonstrating the large inter-subject variability of
the smoked route of drug administration. Moeller et al. measured serum THC and THC-COOH
concentrations in 24 experienced users from 40−220 min after smoking cannabis cigarettes
with a THC content of 300 μg/kg [128]. Mean serum THC and THC-COOH concentrations
were ca. 13 and 22 ng/ml at 40 min, and 1 and 13 ng/ml at 220 min after smoking, respectively.
The half-life of the rapid-distribution phase of THC was estimated to be 55 min over this short
sampling interval.
Most plasma or whole-blood analytical methods for the determination of cannabinoids have
not included measurement of the glucuronide conjugates of THC, 11-OH-THC, or THC-
COOH. The relative percentages of free and conjugated cannabinoids in plasma after different
routes of drug administration are unclear. Even the efficacy of alkaline- and enzymatic-
hydrolysis procedures to release analytes from their conjugates is not fully understood [24]
[77][93][115][118][119][129-133]. In general, the concentrations of conjugate are believed to
be lower in plasma, following intravenous or smoked administration, but may be of much
greater magnitude after oral intake. There is no indication that the glucuronide conjugates are
active, although supporting data are lacking.
Huestis
Page 15
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.1.3. Oral Administration—After oral and sublingual administration of THC, THC-
containing food products, or cannabis-based extracts, the concentrations of THC and 11-OH-
THC are much lower than those found upon smoked administration. Plasma concentrations of
THC in patients receiving 10−15 mg of Marinol® as an anti-emetic were low or even non-
measurable in 57 patients [134]. After daily administration of 10−15 mg of Marinol®,
Brenneisen et al. found peak plasma concentrations of THC and THC-COOH of 2.1−16.9 ng/
ml within 1−8 h, and of 74.5−244 ng/ml within 2−8 h, respectively [42]. In our oral, controlled
THC-administration studies, peak plasma THC, 11-OH-THC, and THC-COOH concentrations
were less than 6.5, 5.6, and 24.4 ng/ml, respectively, following up to 14.8 mg/d of THC in the
form of THC-containing food products or Marinol® [135]. Peak concentrations and time-to-
peak concentrations varied sometimes considerably between subjects. Plasma THC and 11-
OH-THC were negative for all participants and for all doses by 16 h after administration of the
last THC dose. Plasma THC-COOH persisted for a longer period of time, following the two
highest doses of 7.5 mg/d of dronabinol, and 14.8 mg/d of THC in hemp oil. Ohlsson et al.
reported that orally administered THC (20 mg) in a cookie yielded low and irregular plasma
concentrations, compared to intravenous and inhaled THC [5].
3.1.4. Cannabinoid Concentrations after Frequent Use—Most THC plasma data have
been collected following acute exposure; less is known of plasma THC concentrations in
frequent users. Peat reported THC, 11-OH-THC, and THC-COOH plasma concentrations in
frequent cannabis users of 0.86±0.22, 0.46±0.17, and 45.8±13.1 ng/ml, respectively, a
minimum of 12 h after the last smoked dose [136]. No difference in terminal half-life in frequent
or infrequent users was observed. Johansson et al. administered radiolabeled THC to frequent
cannabis users, and found a terminal elimination half-life of 4.1 d for THC in plasma, due to
extensive storage and release from body fat [109].
3.1.5. Prediction Models for Estimation of Cannabis Exposure—There continues to
be controversy in the interpretation of cannabinoid results from blood analysis, some general
concepts having wide support. A dose-response relationship has been demonstrated for smoked
THC and THC plasma concentrations [16][17]. It is well-established that plasma THC
concentrations begin to decline prior to the time of peak effects, although it has been shown
that THC effects appear rapidly after initiation of smoking [15]. Individual drug concentrations
and ratios of cannabinoid metabolite to parent drug concentration have been suggested as
potentially useful indicators of recent drug use [24][137]. Some 45 min after cannabis smoking,
the ratio [THC-COOH]/[THC] in the plasma was reported to be >1 [77]. This is in agreement
with results reported by Mason and McBay [96], and those by Huestis et al. [15], who found
that peak effects occurred when THC and THC-COOH concentrations reached equivalency,
within 30−45 min after initiation of smoking. Measurement of cannabinoid analytes with short
time courses of detection (e.g., 8β,11-dihydroxytetrahydrocannabinol) as markers of recent
THC exposure has not found widespread use [96]. Recent exposure (6−8 h) and possible
impairment have been linked to plasma THC concentrations in excess of 2−3 ng/ml [14][96].
Gjerde et al. [138] suggested that 1.6 ng/ml of THC in whole blood may indicate possible
impairment. This correlates well with the suggested concentration of plasma THC, due to the
fact that THC in hemolyzed blood is approximately one-half the concentration of plasma THC
[139]. Interpretation is further complicated by residual THC and THC-COOH concentrations
found in blood of frequent cannabis users. In general, it is suggested that chronic cannabis
smokers may have residual plasma THC concentrations of <2 ng/ml some 12 h after smoking
cannabis [136]. Significantly higher residual concentrations of THC-COOH may be found.
Accurate prediction of the time of cannabis exposure would provide valuable information in
establishing the role of cannabis as a contributing factor to events under investigation. Two
mathematical models for the prediction of time of cannabis use from the analysis of a single
plasma specimen for cannabinoids were developed [140]. Model I is based on THC
Huestis
Page 16
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

concentrations, and model II is based on the ratio [THC-COOH]/[THC] in the plasma (Fig. 4).
Both models correctly predicted the times of exposure within the 95%-confidence interval for
more than 90% of the specimens evaluated. Furthermore, plasma THC and THC-COOH
concentrations reported in the literature, following oral and smoked cannabis exposure, in
frequent and infrequent cannabis smokers, and with measurements obtained by a wide variety
of methods (including radioimmunoassay and GC/MS analysis), were evaluated with these
models. Plasma THC concentrations <2.0 ng/ml were excluded from use in both models, due
to the possibility of residual THC concentrations in frequent smokers. Manno et al. evaluated
the usefulness of these models in predicting the time of cannabis use in a controlled cannabis-
smoking study [132]. The models were found to accurately predict the time of last use within
the 95%-confidence intervals. Due to the limited distribution of THC and THC-COOH into
red blood cells, it is important to remember, when comparing whole-blood THC and/or THC-
COOH concentrations to plasma concentrations, to double the whole-blood concentration prior
to comparison.
More recently, the validation of these predictive models was extended to include estimation
of time of use after multiple doses of THC and at low THC concentrations (0.5−2 ng/ml),
situations that were not included in the original models [141]. Some 38 cannabis users each
smoked a cigarette containing 2.64% of THC in the morning, and 30 also smoked a second
cigarette in the afternoon. Blood specimens (n=717) were collected at intervals after smoking,
and plasma THC and THC-COOH concentrations were measured by GC/MS analysis. The
predicted times of cannabis smoking, based on each model, were then compared to the actual
smoking times. The most accurate approach applied a combination of models I and II. For all
717 plasma specimens, 99% of the predicted times of last use were within the 95%-confidence
interval, 0.9% were overestimated, and none was underestimated. For 289 plasma specimens
collected after multiple doses, 97% were correct, with no underestimates. All time estimates
were correct for 77 plasma specimens, with THC concentrations of 0.5−2.0 ng/ml, a
concentration range not previously examined. The models provide an objective, validated
method for assessing the contribution of cannabis to accidents or clinical symptoms.
These models also appeared to be valuable when applied to the small amount of data from
published studies of oral ingestion available at the time. Additional studies were performed to
determine if the predictive models could estimate last usage after multiple oral doses, a route
of administration more popular with the advent of cannabis therapies. A total of 18 subjects
received oral THC, as Marinol® or hemp oil [142]. Each of twelve subjects in one group
received a single oral dose of dronabinol (10 mg of synthetic THC). In another protocol, six
subjects received four different oral daily doses, divided into thirds, and administered with
meals for five consecutive days. There was a 10-d washout period between each dosing
regimen. The daily doses were 0.39, 0.47, and 14.8 mg of THC in hemp oil, and 7.5 mg in the
form of dronabinol. Blood specimens were collected throughout the study, and analyzed for
plasma THC and THC-COOH levels by GC/MS analysis, with quantification limits of 0.5 and
1.0 ng/ml, respectively. The actual times between ingestion of THC and blood collection
spanned 0.5−16 h. All plasma specimens with analyte concentrations that were equal to or
larger than the quantification limit (n=90) were evaluated. Models I and II correctly predicted
the time of last THC ingestion in the case of 74.4 and 90.0% of the plasma specimens,
respectively. Some 96.7% of the predicted times were correct, with one overestimate and two
underestimates, using the time interval defined by the lowest and highest 95%-confidence limit
of both models. These results provide further evidence of the usefulness of the predictive
models in estimating the time of last oral THC ingestion following single or multiple doses.
Huestis
Page 17
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.2. Urine Concentrations
Detection of cannabinoids in urine is indicative of prior cannabis exposure, but the long
excretion half-life of THC-COOH in the body, especially in chronic cannabis users, makes it
difficult to predict the timing of past drug use. In a single extreme case, one individual's urine
was positive at a concentration >20 ng/ml (by immunoassay) up to 67 d after last drug exposure
[143]. This individual had used cannabis heavily for more than ten years. However, a naive
user's urine may be found negative by immunoassay after only a few hours following smoking
of a single cannabis cigarette [144]. Assay cutoff concentrations and the sensitivity and
specificity of the immunoassay affect drug-detection times. A positive urine test for
cannabinoids indicates only that drug exposure has occurred. The result does not provide
information on the route of administration, the amount of drug exposure, when drug exposure
occurred, or the degree of impairment.
To date, there are too few urinary data on THC and 11-OH-THC levels to guide interpretation
of positive urine cannabinoid tests; however, data are available for guiding interpretation of
total urinary THC-COOH concentrations. Total THC-COOH concentrations include both the
free THC-COOH and THC-COOH–glucuronide conjugate concentrations determined after
alkaline or enzymatic hydrolysis. Substantial intra- and inter-subject variability occurs in
patterns of THC-COOH excretion. THC-COOH concentration in the first specimen after
smoking is indicative of how rapidly the metabolite can appear in urine. Mean first urine THC-
COOH concentrations were 47±22.3 and 75.3±48.9 ng/ml after smoking one cigarette
containing 1.75 or 3.55% of THC, respectively [113]. Some 50% of the subjects’ first urine
specimen after the low dose, and some 83% of the first urine specimens after the high dose
were positive by GC/MS at a THC-COOH cutoff concentration of 15 ng/ml. Thus, THC-COOH
concentrations in the first urine specimen are dependent upon the relative potency of the
cigarette, the elapsed time following drug administration, smoking efficiency, and individual
differences in drug metabolism and excretion. Mean peak urine THC-COOH concentrations
averaged at 89.8±31.9 ng/ml (range 20.6−234.2 ng/ml) and 153.4±49.2 ng/ml (range 29.9
−355.2 ng/ml) following smoking of ca. 15.8 and 33.8 mg of THC, respectively. The mean
times of peak urine concentration were 7.7±0.8 h and 13.9±3.5 h for the low and high dose,
respectively. Although peak concentrations appeared to be dose-related, there was a twelvefold
variation between individuals.
3.2.1. THC-COOH Detection Windows in Urine—Drug detection time, or the duration
of time after drug administration in which the urine of an individual tests positive for
cannabinoids, is an important factor in the interpretation of urine drug results. Detection time
is dependent on pharmacological factors (e.g., drug dose, type of administration, rates of
metabolism and excretion) and analytical factors (e.g., assay sensitivity, specificity, accuracy).
Mean detection times in urine following smoking vary considerably between subjects, even in
controlled smoking studies, where cannabis dosing is standardized and smoking is computer-
paced. During the terminal elimination phase, consecutive urine specimens may fluctuate
between positive and negative, as THC-COOH concentrations approach the cutoff
concentration. It may be important in drug-treatment settings or in clinical trials to differentiate
between new drug use and residual excretion of previously used cannabinoids. After smoking
a cigarette containing 1.75% of THC, three out of six subjects had additional positive urine
samples interspersed between negative urine samples [144]. This had the effect of producing
much longer detection times for the last positive specimen. With a currently accepted
confirmation cutoff of 15 ng/ml for THC-COOH, which is most often used in urine-drug
testing, the mean GC/MS THC-COOH detection times for the last positive urine sample,
following the smoking of a single cigarette with 1.75 or 3.55% of THC, were 33.7±9.2 h (range
8−68.5 h) and 88.6±23.2 h (range 57−122.3 h), respectively. Wingert et al. reported that
Huestis
Page 18
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

lowering the urine immunoassay cutoff from 50 to 20 ng/ml, and employing a confirmation
cutoff of 10 ng/ml, increased the THC positive rate from 2.8 to 4.1% [145].
3.2.2. Normalization of Cannabinoid Urine Concentrations to Urine Creatinine
Concentrations—Normalization of cannabinoid concentration to urine creatinine
concentration aids in the differentiation of new from prior cannabis use, and reduces the
variability of drug measurement due to urine dilution. Due to the long half-life of drug in the
body, especially in chronic cannabis users, toxicologists and practitioners are frequently asked
to determine if a positive urine test represents a new episode of drug use or represents continued
excretion of residual drug. Random urine specimens contain varying amounts of creatinine,
depending on the degree of concentration of the urine. Hawks first suggested creatinine
normalization of urine test results to account for variations in urine volume in the bladder
[146]. Whereas urine volume is highly variable due to changes in liquid, salt, and protein intake,
exercise, and age, creatinine excretion is much more stable.
Manno et al. recommended that an increase of 150% in the creatinine-normalized cannabinoid
concentration above the previous specimen can be considered indicative of a new episode of
drug exposure [147]. If the increase is greater than or equal to the threshold selected, then new
use is predicted. This approach has received wide attention for potential use in treatment and
employee-assistance programs, but there was limited evaluation of the usefulness of this ratio
under controlled dosing conditions.
Huestis and Cone conducted a controlled clinical study of the excretion profile of creatinine
and cannabinoid metabolites in a group of six cannabis users, who smoked two different doses
of cannabis, separated by weekly intervals [148]. As seen in Fig. 5, normalization of urinary
THC-COOH concentration to the urinary creatinine concentration produces a smoother
excretion pattern and facilitates interpretation of consecutive urine drug-test results.
Being able to differentiate new cannabis use from residual THC-COOH excretion in urine
would be highly useful for drug treatment, criminal justice, and employee assistance drug
testing programs. We evaluated the ratios of creatinine normalized THC-COOH concentrations
from more than 1800 pairs of urine specimens collected during a controlled smoked THC
administration study. The ratio times 100 of the creatinine normalized later specimen divided
by the creatinine normalized earlier specimen were evaluated for determining the best ratio to
predict new cannabis use. A relative operating characteristic (ROC) curve was constructed
from sensitivity and specificity data for 26 different cutoffs, ranging from 10 to 200%. The
most accurate ratio (85.4%) was 50%, with a sensitivity of 80.1%, a specificity of 90.2%, and
false positive and false negative predictions of 5.6 and 7.4%, respectively. When the previously
recommended increase of 150% was used as a threshold for new use, sensitivity of detecting
new use was only 33.4%, and specificity was high (99.8%), for an overall accuracy prediction
of 74.2%. To further substantiate the validity of the derived ROC curve, urine-cannabinoid-
metabolite and creatinine data from another controlled clinical trial that specifically addressed
water dilution as a means of specimen adulteration were evaluated [149]. Sensitivity,
specificity, accuracy, and false positives and negatives were 71.9, 91.6, 83.9, 5.4, and 10.7%,
respectively, when the 50% criteria was applied. These data indicate that selection of a
threshold to evaluate sequential creatinine-normalized urine drug concentrations can improve
the ability to distinguish residual excretion from new drug usage.
Lafolie et al. reported the results of urinary excretion of cannabinoids by a heavy cannabis
smoker [150]. Cannabinoids were detectable for 93 d after cessation of smoking, with a
decreasing ratio of cannabinoids to creatinine over time. An excretion half-life of 32 d was
determined. When cannabinoid concentrations had not been normalized to creatinine
concentrations, a number of false positive indications of new drug use would have occurred.
Huestis
Page 19
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fraser et al. conducted a series of studies evaluating the application of [THC-COOH]/
[creatinine] ratios for urine specimens collected at least 96 h apart from heavy, chronic cannabis
users in an outpatient setting [151-153]. Mean urinary THC-COOH concentrations, mean
[THC-COOH]/[creatinine] ratios, and mean [THC-COOH]/[creatinine] ratios from
consecutively collected specimens were considerably above the proposed 50% ratio to
differentiate new use. The proposed 50% ratio was developed from more than 1,800 urine
specimens collected after occasional cannabis use on a secure research unit [148]. As
suggested, the 50% ratio may not be appropriate for differentiating new drug use from residual
drug excretion in heavy users. [THC-COOH]/[Creatinine] ratios decrease reliably until THC-
COOH concentrations are between 20−50 ng/ml. Within this range, cannabinoid excretion is
more variable, most likely based on the slow and variable release of stored THC from fat tissue.
The factors governing release of THC stores are not known. Additional research is being
performed to attempt to determine appropriate ratio cutoffs for reliably predicting new drug
use in heavy, chronic users.
3.3. Oral-Fluid Testing
Oral fluid also is a suitable specimen for monitoring cannabinoid exposure, and is being
evaluated for driving under the influence of drugs, drug treatment, workplace drug testing, and
for clinical trials [154-159]. Adequate sensitivity is best achieved with an assay directed toward
detection of THC, rather than of 11-OH-THC or THC-COOH. The oral mucosa is exposed to
high concentrations of THC during smoking, and serves as the source of THC found in oral
fluid. Only minor amounts of drug and metabolites diffuse from the plasma into oral fluid
[146]. Following intravenous administration of radiolabeled THC, no radioactivity could be
demonstrated in oral fluid [160]. No measurable 11-OH-THC or THC-COOH were found by
GC/MS (detection limit 0.5 ng/ml) in oral fluid for 7 d, following cannabis smoking [161], or
in oral fluid from 22 subjects positive for THC-COOH in the urine [162]. Oral fluid collected
with the Salivette collection device was positive for THC in 14 of these 22 participants.
Although no 11-OH-THC or THC-COOH was identified by GC/MS, CBN and CBD were
found in addition to THC. Several hours after smoking, the oral mucosa serves as a depot for
release of THC into the oral fluid. In addition, as detection limits continue to decrease with the
development of new analytical instrumentation, it may be possible to measure low
concentrations of THC-COOH in oral fluid.
Detection times of cannabinoids in oral fluid are shorter than in urine, and more indicative of
recent cannabis use [154][156]. Oral-fluid THC concentrations temporally correlate with
plasma cannabinoid concentrations and behavioral and physiological effects, but wide intra-
and inter-individual variation precludes the use of oral-fluid concentrations as indicators of
drug impairment [161][163]. THC may be detected at low concentrations by
radioimmunoassay for up to 24 h after use.
Fig. 6 depicts excretion of THC in oral fluid and plasma, as well as creatinine-normalized
THC-COOH excretion in urine in one subject after smoking a single cannabis cigarette
containing 3.55% of THC [164]. After smoking cannabis, oral-fluid cannabinoid tests were
positive for THC by GC/MS/MS, with a cutoff of 0.5 ng/ml for 13±3 h (range 1−24 h) [165].
After these times, occasional positive oral-fluid results were interspersed with negative tests
for up to 34 h.
Peel et al. tested oral-fluid samples from 56 drivers, suspected of being under the influence of
cannabis, with the EMIT® screening test and by GC/MS analysis [166]. They suggested that
the ease and non-invasiveness of sample collection made oral fluid a useful alternative matrix
for detection of recent cannabis use. Oral-fluid samples also are being evaluated in the
European Union's Roadside Testing Assessment (ROSITA) project to reduce the number of
individuals driving under the influence of drugs and to improve road safety. The ease and non-
Huestis
Page 20
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

invasiveness of oral-fluid collection, reduced hazards in specimen handling and testing, and
shorter detection window are attractive attributes to the use of this specimen for identifying
the presence of potentially performance-impairing drugs.
Laloup et al. compared THC levels in oral fluid (collected with the Intercept® device) and
plasma from 139 individuals suspected of driving under the influence of drugs, using LC/MS/
MS [167]. They determined that, with a limit of quantification of 0.5 ng/ml in the plasma, the
optimal cut-off in oral fluid was 1.2 ng/ml, yielding a sensitivity of 94.7% and a specificity of
92.0%. When a higher plasma cutoff was the target (2 ng/ml), oral fluid THC concentrations
of 5.2 ng/ml reliably predicted a positive blood THC result, with a sensitivity of 91.6% and a
specificity of 88.6%.
In a recent study of smoked and oral cannabis, the Intercept DOA Oral-Specimen-Collection
Device and GC/MS/MS (cutoff 0.5 ng/ml) were paired to monitor oral-fluid cannabinoids in
ten participants [165]. As mentioned above, oral-fluid specimens tested positive for up to 34
h. A different oral-fluid collection device, the Cozart RapiScan device, was used with a
cannabinoid cutoff of 10 ng/ml to screen for cannabis use [168]. Positive oral-fluid cannabinoid
tests were not obtained more than 2 h after last use, suggesting that much lower cutoff
concentrations were needed to improve sensitivity. A procedure for direct analysis of
cannabinoids in oral fluid with solid-phase micro-extraction and ion-trap GC/MS has been
developed, with a limit of detection of 1.0 ng/ml [169]. Detection of cannabinoids in oral fluid
is a rapidly developing field; however, there are many scientific issues to resolve. One of the
most important is the degree of absorption of the drug to oral-fluid collection devices.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in oral-fluid drug testing for programs associated
with drug treatment, workplace, and driving under the influence of drugs. Small and
inconsistent specimen volume collection, poor extraction of cannabinoids from the collection
device, low analyte concentrations for cannabinoids, and the potential for external
contamination from environmental smoke are limitations to this monitoring method. Recently,
independent evaluations of the extraction of cannabinoids from the collection device
[170-173] and measurement of oral-fluid THC-COOH in concentrations as low as picograms
per milliliter appear to adequately address these potential problems. Day et al. reached a
detection limit of 10 pg/ml for THC-COOH in oral fluid by GC/MS/MS [174]. Moore et al.
developed a GC/MS method using a micro-fluidic Dean's switch for two-dimensional (2D)
chromatography to sufficiently improve signal to noise, allowing the monitoring of THC-
COOH concentrations of ≥ 2 pg/ml in oral fluid [175]. Extraction efficiency for THC-COOH
from the Quantisal™ (Immunalysis, Pomona, CA) oral-fluid collection device was 80% at a
concentration of 10 pg/ml, with a coefficient of variation of 8.23%. The extraction efficiency
of the buffer was reported to be between 79.6 and 91.4% for various concentrations of THC
[173]. Specimens collected almost immediately after smoking cannabis, i.e., after 15 and 45
min, and later, after 1, 2, and 8 h, all contained THC-COOH. This new method was used for
the analysis of 143 oral-fluid specimens, screening positive for cannabinoids by Enzyme-
Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). Some 95 specimens (66.4%) tested positive for THC
and THC-COOH; 14 (9.7%) were positive for THC-COOH only, and 27 (18.8%) were positive
for THC only [176]. The observation that THC-COOH was found in 76.2% of the tested oral-
fluid specimens, screening positive for cannabinoids, suggests that there is a definitive means
of differentiating passive cannabis exposure from actual cannabis usage. This limitation has
curtailed the use of oral-fluid testing to monitor cannabis use.
Niedbala et al. evaluated passive contamination of oral fluid in individuals exposed to cannabis
smoke in an enclosed car [177]. First, oral-fluid collection devices were contaminated when
opened within the smoke-filled car. When the specimens were collected outside of the car,
immediately following smoking, specimens from passive smokers were negative.
Huestis
Page 21
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Environmental cannabis smoke can contaminate collection devices, unless specimens are
collected outside the area of smoke contamination.
3.4. Cannabinoids in Sweat
To date, there are no published data on the excretion of cannabinoids in sweat following
controlled THC administration, although our laboratory at NIH is conducting such research.
Sweat testing is being applied to monitor cannabis use in drug treatment, criminal justice,
workplace drug testing, and clinical studies [161][178]. In 1989, Balabanova and Schneider
used radioimmunoassay to detect cannabinoids in apocrine sweat [179]. Currently, there is a
single commercially available sweat-collection device, the PharmChek patch (PharmChem
Laboratories, Texas, USA). Generally, the patch is worn for 7 d, and then exchanged for a new
patch once each week during visits to the treatment clinic or parole officer. Theoretically, this
permits constant monitoring of drug use throughout the week, extending the window of drug
detection and improving test sensitivity. As with oral-fluid testing, this is a developing
analytical technique, with much to be learned about the pharmacokinetics of cannabinoid
excretion in sweat, potential re-absorption of THC by the skin, possible degradation of THC
on the patch, and adsorption of THC onto the patch-collection device. It is known that THC is
the primary analyte detected in sweat, with little 11-OH-THC and THC-COOH. Understanding
the pharmacokinetics of THC excretion also is important for the interpretation of hair
cannabinoid tests, as sweat has been shown to contribute to the amount of drug found in hair
(see below).
Several investigators have evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of different screening assays
for detecting cannabinoids in sweat [157][180]. Kintz et al. identified THC (4−38 ng/patch) in
20 known heroin abusers who wore the PharmChek patch for 5 d, while attending a
detoxification center [181]. Sweat was extracted with MeOH, and analyzed by GC/MS. The
same investigators also evaluated forehead swipes with cosmetic pads for monitoring
cannabinoids in sweat from individuals suspected of driving under the influence of drugs
[162]. THC, but not 11-OH-THC or THC-COOH, was detected (4−152 ng/pad) by GC/EI-MS
in the sweat of 16 out of 22 individuals who tested positive for cannabinoids in urine. Ion-trap
tandem mass spectrometry also has been used to measure cannabinoids in sweat collected with
the PharmChek sweat patch, with a detection limit of 1 ng/patch [182].
3.5. Cannabinoids in Hair
There are multiple mechanisms for the incorporation of cannabinoids in hair. THC and its
metabolites may be incorporated into the hair bulb that is surrounded by capillaries. Drug may
also diffuse into hair from sebum secreted onto the hair shaft, and from sweat excreted onto
the skin surface. Drug may also be incorporated into hair from the environment. Cannabis is
primarily smoked, providing an opportunity for environmental contamination of hair with THC
in cannabis smoke. Basic drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine concentrate in hair due
to ionic bonding to melanin, the pigment in hair that determines hair color. The more neutral
and lipophilic THC is not strongly bound to melanin, resulting in much lower concentrations
of THC in hair as compared to other drugs of abuse. Usually, THC is present in hair at a higher
concentration than its THC-COOH metabolite [183-186].
An advantage of measuring THC-COOH in hair is that this compound is not present in cannabis
smoke, avoiding the issue of passive exposure from the environment. Analysis of cannabinoids
in hair is challenging due to the high analytical sensitivity required. THC-COOH is present in
the femto- to picogram range per milligram of hair. GC/MS/MS Analysis has been required in
most analytical investigations, but a new procedure based on GC/MS equipped with a Dean's
switch and cryofocusing was recently published [187]. Cirimele et al. [188] proposed a novel
approach to the screening of hair specimens for the presence of cannabinoids in hair. They
Huestis
Page 22
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

developed a rapid, simple GC/MS screening method for THC, CBN, and CBD in hair, which
did not require derivatization prior to analysis. The method was found to be a sensitive screen
for cannabis detection by GC/MS analysis; identification of THC-COOH was recommended
as a confirmatory procedure.
It is difficult to conduct controlled cannabinoid-administration studies on the disposition of
cannabinoids in hair because of the inability to differentiate administered drug from previously
self-administered cannabis. If isotopically labeled drug were administered, it would be possible
to identify newly administered drug in hair. There are advantages to monitoring drug use with
hair testing, including a wide window of drug detection, a less invasive specimen-collection
procedure, and the ability to collect a second specimen at a later time. However, one of the
weakest aspects of testing for cannabinoids in hair is the low sensitivity of drug detection in
this alternate matrix.
In the only controlled cannabinoid dosing study published to date, Huestis et al. collected 53
head-hair specimens from 38 males with a history of cannabis use documented by
questionnaire, urinalysis, and controlled, double-blind administration of THC [189]. Subjects
completed a questionnaire indicating daily cannabis use (N=18) or non-daily use, i.e., smoking
one to five cannabis cigarettes per week (N=20). Hair specimens were collected from each
subject at the time of admittance to a closed research unit, following smoking of two cigarettes
containing 2.7% of THC (N=13), or following multiple oral doses with a total of 116 mg THC
(N=2). Pre- and post-dose detection rates did not differ statistically. Therefore, all 53 specimens
were considered as one group. Some 19 specimens (36%) had no detectable THC or THC-
COOH at the GC/MS/MS limits of quantification of 1.0 and 0.1 pg/mg hair, respectively. Two
specimens (3.8%) had measurable THC only, 14 (26%) showed THC-COOH only, and 18
(34%) had both cannabinoids. Detection rates were significantly different (p<0.05, Fisher's
exact test) between daily cannabis users (85%) and non-daily users (52%). There was no
difference in detection rates between African, American, and Caucasian subjects (p>0.3,
Fisher's exact test). For specimens with detectable cannabinoids, concentrations ranged from
3.4 to >100 pg THC/mg, and from 0.10 to 7.3 pg THC-COOH/mg hair. THC and THC-COOH
concentrations were positively correlated (r=0.38, p<0.01, Pearson's product moment
correlation). Only about one-third of non-daily users and two-thirds of daily cannabis users
gave rise to positive cannabinoid hair tests by GC/MS/MS, with detection limits of 1 and 0.1
ng/mg for THC and THC-COOH, respectively. All participants showed positive urine
cannabinoid tests at the time of hair collection.
### 4. Conclusions
An understanding of human cannabinoid pharmacokinetics is important for the development
and monitoring of new therapeutic medications and to the interpretation of cannabinoid test
results in a wide variety of biological matrices, including blood, plasma, urine, oral fluid, sweat,
and hair. With the advent of new preparations containing THC, CBD, and other cannabinoids,
and new administration routes, additional research is needed. Also, controlled drug-
administration studies that provide the scientific database for interpreting cannabinoid
concentrations in biological fluids and tissues are increasingly difficult to conduct due to safety
and ethical concerns, and because of the high costs of performing human research. However,
these data are essential for appropriate application of pharmacotherapies, and for drug testing
in treatment, workplace, and forensic cases.
### REFERENCES
1. Turner CE, ElSohly MA, Boeren EG. J. Nat. Prod 1980;43:169. [PubMed: 6991645]
2. Claussen U, Korte F. Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem 1968;713:162. [PubMed: 5684054]
Huestis
Page 23
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3. ElSohly, HN.; Boeren, EG.; Turner, CE.; ElSohly, MA. The Cannabinoids: Chemical, Pharmacologic
and Therapeutic Aspects. Agurell, S.; Dewey, WL.; Willette, RE., editors. Academic Press; Orlando:
1984. p. 89
4. Mechoulam R. Science 1970;168:1159. [PubMed: 4910003]
5. Ohlsson A, Lindgren JE, Wahlen A, Agurell S, Hollister LE, Gillespie HK. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther
1980;28:409. [PubMed: 6250760]
6. Agurell S, Leander K. Acta Pharm. Suecica 1971;8:391.
7. Ohlsson, A.; Agurell, S.; Londgren, JE.; Gillespie, HK.; Hollister, LE. Pharmacokinetics and
Pharmacodynamics of Psychoactive Drugs. Barnett, G.; Chiang, CN., editors. Mosby Yearbook; St.
Louis: 1985. p. 75
8. Agurell S, Halldin M, Lindgren JE, Ohlsson A, Widman M, Gillespie H, Hollister L. Pharmacol. Rev
1986;38:21. [PubMed: 3012605]
9. Ohlsson A, Lindgren JE, Wahlen A, Agurell S, Hollister LE, Gillespie HK. Biomed. Environ. Mass
Spectrom 1982;9:6.
10. Azorlosa JL, Heishman SJ, Stitzer ML, Mahaffey JM. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Ther 1992;261:114.
[PubMed: 1313866]
11. Heishman SJ, Stitzer ML, Yingling JE. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav 1989;34:173. [PubMed:
2560548]
12. Perez-Reyes M. NIDA Res. Monograph 1990;99:42.
13. Cami J, Guerra D, Ugena B, Segura J, de La Torre R. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav 1991;40:115.
[PubMed: 1664106]
14. Huestis MA, Henningfield JE, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 1992;16:276. [PubMed: 1338215]
15. Huestis MA, Sampson AH, Holicky BJ, Henningfield JE, Cone EJ. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 1992;52:31.
[PubMed: 1320536]
16. Perez-Reyes M, Di Guiseppi S, Davis KH, Schindler VH, Cook CE. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther
1982;31:617. [PubMed: 6280918]
17. Perez-Reyes M, Owens SM, Di Guiseppi S. J. Clin. Pharmacol 1981;21:201S. [PubMed: 6271825]
18. ElSohly MA, Ross SA, Mehmedic Z, Arafat R, Banahan BFI. J. Forensic Sci 2000;45:24. [PubMed:
10641915]
19. Russo EB, McPartland JM. Psychopharmacology 2003;165:431. [PubMed: 12491031]
20. Bornheim LM, Grillo MP. Chem. Res. Toxicol 1998;11:1209. [PubMed: 9778318]
21. Harvey, DJ. Marijuana and Medicine. Nahas, GG.; Sutin, KM.; Harvey, DJ.; Agurell, S., editors.
Humana Press; Totowa: 2001. p. 91
22. Mechoulam R, Hanus L. Chem. Phys. Lipids 2002;121:35. [PubMed: 12505688]
23. Harder S, Rietbrock S. Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 1997;35:155. [PubMed: 9112136]
24. Law B, Mason PA, Moffat AC, Gleadle RI, King LJ. J. Pharm. Pharmacol 1984;36:289. [PubMed:
6145762]
25. Ohlsson A, Lindgren JE, Wahlen A, Agurell S, Hollister LE, Gillespie HK. NIDA Res. Monograph
1981;34:250.
26. Perez-Reyes M, Lipton MA, Timmons MC, Wall ME, Brine DR, Davis KH. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther
1973;14:48. [PubMed: 4683071]
27. Wall ME, Sadler BM, Brine D, Taylor H, Perez-Reyes M. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 1983;34:352.
[PubMed: 6309462]
28. Kim KR, Yoon HR. J. Chromatogr., Sect. B 1996;682:55.
29. Binitie A. Psychopharmacologia 1975;44:301. [PubMed: 1208765]
30. Meier HJ, Vonesch HJ. Schweiz. Med. Wochenschr 1997;127:214. [PubMed: 9157527]
31. Goodwin RS, Gustafson RA, Barnes A, Nebro W, Moolchan ET, Huestis MA. Ther. Drug Monit
2006;28:545. [PubMed: 16885723]
32. Gustafson RA, Moolchan ET, Barnes A, Levine B, Huestis MA. J. Chromatogr., B 2003;798:145.
33. Nadulski T, Sporkert F, Schnelle M, Stadelmann AM, Roser P, Schefter T, Pragst F. J. Anal. Toxicol
2005;29:782. [PubMed: 16356335]
34. Mechoulam R. Br. J. Pharmacol 2005;146:913. [PubMed: 16205721]
Huestis
Page 24
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

35. Zias J, Stark H, Seligman J, Levy R, Werker E, Breuer A, Mechoulam R. Nature 1993;363:215.
[PubMed: 8387642]
36. Russo E, Guy GW. Med. Hypotheses 2006;66:234. [PubMed: 16209908]
37. Vaughan, CW.; Christie, MJ. Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Pharmacology, Toxicology, and
Therapeutic Potential. Grotenhermen, F.; Russo, E., editors. The Haworth Integrative Healing Press;
New York: 1984. p. 89
38. Holdcroft, A. Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutic Potential.
Grotenhermen, F.; Russo, E., editors. The Haworth Integrative Healing Press; New York: 1984. p.
181
39. Zajicek J, Fox P, Sanders H, Wright D, Vickery J, Nunn A, Thompson A. Lancet 2003;362:1517.
[PubMed: 14615106]
40. Mattes RD, Shaw LM, Edling-Owens J, Engelman K, ElSohly MA. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav
1993;44:745. [PubMed: 8383856]
41. Mattes RD, Engelman K, Shaw LM, ElSohly MA. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav 1994;49:187.
[PubMed: 7816872]
42. Brenneisen R, Egli A, ElSohly MA, Henn V, Spiess Y. Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 1996;34:446.
[PubMed: 8897084]
43. Stinchcomb AL, Valiveti S, Hammell DC, Ramsey DR. J. Pharm. Pharmacol 2004;56:291. [PubMed:
15025853]
44. Scheuplein RJ. J. Invest. Dermatol 1967;48:79. [PubMed: 6018244]
45. Challapalli PV, Stinchcomb AL. Int J. Pharm 2002;241:329. [PubMed: 12100860]
46. Valiveti S, Hammell DC, Earles DC, Stinchcomb AL. J. Pharm. Sci 2004;93:1154. [PubMed:
15067692]
47. Vinciguerra V, Moore T, Brennan E. N. Y. State J. Med 1988;88:525. [PubMed: 3231372]
48. D'Souza DC, Perry E, MacDougall L, Ammerman Y, Cooper T, Wu YT, Braley G, Gueorguieva R,
Krystal JH. Neuropsychopharmacology 2004;29:1558. [PubMed: 15173844]
49. Perez-Reyes M, Timmons MC, Davis KH, Wall EM. Experientia 1973;29:1368. [PubMed: 4761242]
50. Benowitz NL, Nguyen TL, Jones RT, Herning RI, Bachman J. Clin. Pharm. Ther 1980;28:115.
51. Hampson AJ, Grimaldi M, Axelrod J, Wink D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 1998;95:8268. [PubMed:
9653176]
52. Karst M, Salim K, Burstein S, Conrad I, Hoy L, Schneider U. J. Am. Med. Assoc 2003;290:1757.
53. Melamede, R. Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutic Potential.
Grotenhermen, F.; Russo, E., editors. The Haworth Integrative Healing Press; New York: 1984. p.
111
54. Plasse, T. Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutic Potential.
Grotenhermen, F.; Russo, E., editors. The Haworth Integrative Healing Press; New York: 1984. p.
165
55. Baker D, Pryce G, Croxford JL, Brown P, Pertwee RG, Huffman JW, Layward L. Nature 2000;404:84.
[PubMed: 10716447]
56. Malfait AM, Galllily R, Sumariwalla PF, Malik AS, Andreakos E, Mechoulam R, Feldmann M. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 2000;97:9561. [PubMed: 10920191]
57. Zuardi AW, Shirakawa I, Finkelfarb E, Karniol IG. Psychopharmacology 1982;76:245. [PubMed:
6285406]
58. McArdle K, Mackie P, Pertwee R, Guy G, Whittle B, Hawksworth G. Toxicology 2001;168:133.
59. Agurell, S.; Gillespie, H.; Halldin, M.; Hollister, LE.; Johansson, E.; Lindgren, JE.; Ohlsson, A.;
Szirmai, M.; Widman, M. Marihuana '84: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Cannabis.
Harvey, DJ.; Paton, WDM.; Nahas, GG., editors. IRL Press; Oxford: 1984. p. 49
60. Ohlsson A, Lindgren JE, Andersson S, Agurell S, Gillespie H, Hollister LE. Biomed. Environ. Mass
Spectrom 1986;13:77. [PubMed: 2937482]
61. Agurell S, Carlsson S, Lindgren JE, Ohlsson A, Gillespie H, Hollister L. Experientia 1981;37:1090.
[PubMed: 6273208]
62. Guy GW, Robson PJ. J. Cannabis Ther 2004;3:121.
Huestis
Page 25
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

63. Guy GW, Robson PJ. J. Cannabis Ther 2004;3:79.
64. Lemberger L, Silberstein SD, Axelrod J, Kopin IJ. Science 1970;170:1320. [PubMed: 5479011]
65. Nahas GG, Frick HC, Lattimer JK, Latour C, Harvey D. Human Psychopharmacol 2002;17:103.
66. Kreuz DS, Axelrod J. Science 1973;179:391. [PubMed: 4682965]
67. Garrett ER. Adv. Biosci 1978;22−23:105.
68. Harvey, DJ.; Leuschner, JTA.; Paton, WDM. Marihuana '84: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium
on Cannabis. Harvey, DJ.; Paton, WDM.; Nahas, GG., editors. IRL Press; Oxford: 1984. p. 77
69. Johansson E, Norén K, Sjövall J, Halldin MM. Biomed. Chromatogr 1989;3:35. [PubMed: 2539872]
70. Grotenhermen F. Clin. Pharmacokinet 2003;42:327. [PubMed: 12648025]
71. Dewey WL, McMillan DE, Harris LS, Turk RF. Biochem. Pharmacol 1972;22:399. [PubMed:
4687135]
72. Hunt CA, Jones RT. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Ther 1980;215:35. [PubMed: 6256518]
73. Adams IB, Martin BR. Addiction 1996;91:1585. [PubMed: 8972919]
74. Mura P, Kintz P, Dumestre V, Raul S, Hauet T. J. Anal. Toxicol 2005;29:842. [PubMed: 16356342]
75. Brunet B, Doucet C, Venisse N, Hauet T, Hebrard W, Papet Y, Mauco G, Mura P. Forensic Sci. Int
2006;161:169. [PubMed: 16859848]
76. Perez-Reyes M, Timmons MC, Lipton MA, Davis KH, Wall ME. Science 1972;177:633. [PubMed:
4558903]
77. Kelly P, Jones RT. J. Anal. Toxicol 1992;16:228. [PubMed: 1323733]
78. Skopp G, Potsch L, Mauden M, Richter B. Forensic Sci. Int 2002;126:17. [PubMed: 11955826]
79. Lee CC, Chiang CN. NIDA Res. Monograph 1985;60:110.
80. Bailey JR, Cunny HC, Paule M, Slikker W Jr. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol 1987;90:315. [PubMed:
2820086]
81. Martin BR, Dewey WL, Harris LS, Beckner JS. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Pharmacol
1977;17:457. [PubMed: 897339]
82. Blackard C, Tennes K. New Engl. J. Med 1984;311:797. [PubMed: 6088979]
83. Atkinson HC, Begg EJ, Darrlow BA. Clin. Pharmacokinet 1988;14:217. [PubMed: 3292101]
84. Perez-Reyes M, Wall ME. N. Engl. J. Med 1982;307:819. [PubMed: 6287261]
85. Burstein S, Rosenfeld J, Wittstruck T. Science 1972;176:422. [PubMed: 5026162]
86. Ben-Zvi, Z.; Bergen, JR.; Burstein, S.; Sehgal, PK.; Varanelli, C. The Pharmacology of Marijuana.
Braude, MC.; Szara, S., editors. Raven Press; New York: 1976. p. 63
87. Ben-Zvi Z, Burstein S. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Pharmacol 1974;8:223. [PubMed: 4855455]
88. Harvey, DJ.; Martin, BR.; Paton, WDM. Marijuana: Biological Effects. Nahas, GG.; Paton, WDM.,
editors. Pergamon Press; Oxford: 1979. p. 45
89. Iribarne C, Berthou F, Baird S, Dreano Y, Picart D, Bail JP, Beaune P, Menez JF. Chem. Res. Toxicol
1996;9:365. [PubMed: 8839037]
90. Matsunaga T, Iwawaki Y, Watanabe K, Yamamoto I, Kageyama T, Yoshimura H. Life Sci
1995;56:2089. [PubMed: 7776836]
91. Harvey DJ, Paton WDM. Rev. Biochem. Toxicol 1986;6:221.
92. Bornheim LM, Lasker JM, Raucy JL. Drug Metab. Dispos 1992;20:241. [PubMed: 1352216]
93. McBurney LJ, Bobbie BA, Sepp LA. J. Anal. Toxicol 1986;10:56. [PubMed: 3009969]
94. Mechoulam R, Zvi ZB, Agurell S, Nilsson IM, Nilsson JLG, Edery H, Grunfeld Y. Experientia
1973;29:1193. [PubMed: 4758913]
95. Halldin MM, Widman M, Bahr CV, Lindgren JE, Martin BR. Drug Metab. Dispos 1982;10:297.
[PubMed: 6126323]
96. Mason AP, McBay AJ. J. Forensic Sci 1985;30:615. [PubMed: 2993473]
97. Sporkert, F.; Pragst, F.; Ploner, CJ.; Tschirch, A.; Stadelmann, AM. Annual Meeting of the
International Association of Forensic Toxicologists (TIAFT); Prague, Czech Republic. August 26
−30, 2001; p. 62
98. Garrett ER, Hunt CA. J. Pharm. Sci 1977;66:395. [PubMed: 845807]
99. Lemberger L, Tamarkin NR, Axelrod J. Science 1971;173:72. [PubMed: 5087483]
Huestis
Page 26
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

100. Harvey DJ, Mechoulam R. Xenobiotica 1990;20:303. [PubMed: 2336840]
101. Greene ML, Saunders DR. Gastroenterology 1974;66:365. [PubMed: 4813501]
102. Krishna DR, Klotz U. Clin. Pharmacokinet 1994;26:144. [PubMed: 8162658]
103. Watanabe K, Tanaka T, Yamamoto I, Yoshimura H. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 1988;157:75.
[PubMed: 2848522]
104. Widman M, Nordqvist M, Dollery CT, Briant RH. J. Pharm. Pharmacol 1975;27:842. [PubMed:
1493]
105. Wall, ME.; Brine, DR.; Perez-Reyes, M. The Pharmacology of Marihuana. Braude, MC.; Szara, S.,
editors. Raven Press; New York: 1976. p. 93
106. Hunt CA, Jones RT, Herning RI, Bachman J. J. Pharmacokinet. Biopharm 1981;9:245. [PubMed:
6270295]
107. Nadulski T, Pragst F, Weinberg G, Roser P, Schnelle M, Fronk EM, Stadelmann AM. Ther. Drug
Monit 2005;27:799. [PubMed: 16306858]
108. Williams PL, Moffat AC. J. Pharm. Pharmacol 1980;32:445. [PubMed: 6105177]
109. Johansson E, Agurell S, Hollister LE, Halldin MM. J. Pharm. Pharmacol 1988;40:374. [PubMed:
2899638]
110. Johansson E, Halldin MM, Agurell S, Hollister LE, Gillespie HK. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol
1989;37:273. [PubMed: 2558889]
111. Johansson E, Halldin MM. J. Anal. Toxicol 1989;13:218. [PubMed: 2550702]
112. Chiang CN, Rapaka RS. NIDA Res. Monograph 1987;79:173.
113. Huestis MA, Mitchell JM, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 1996;20:441. [PubMed: 8889681]
114. Lindgren JE, Ohlsson A, Agurell S, Hollister L, Gillespie H. Psychopharmacology 1981;74:208.
[PubMed: 6267648]
115. Wall ME, Perez-Reyes M. J. Clin. Pharmacol 1981;21:178S. [PubMed: 6271823]
116. Gustafson RA, Levine B, Stout PR, Klette KL, George MP, Moolchan ET, Huestis MA. Clin. Chem
2003;49:1114. [PubMed: 12816908]
117. Gustafson RA, Kim I, Stout PR, Klette KL, George MP, Moolchan ET, Levine B, Huestis MA. J.
Anal. Toxicol 2004;28:160. [PubMed: 15107145]
118. Kemp PM, Abukhalaf IK, Manno JE, Manno BR, Alford DD, McWilliams ME, Nixon FE, Fitzgerald
MJ, Reeves RR, Wood MJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 1995;19:292. [PubMed: 7500615]
119. Kemp PM, Abukhalaf IK, Manno JE, Manno BR, Alford DD, Abusada GA. J. Anal. Toxicol
1995;19:285. [PubMed: 7500614]
120. Blanc JA, Manneh VA, Ernst R, Berger DE, de Keczer SA, Chase C, Centofanti JM, DeLizza AJ.
Clin. Chem 1993;39:1705. [PubMed: 8394791]
121. Bloom AS. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Ther 1982;221:97. [PubMed: 6278139]
122. Christophersen AS. J. Anal. Toxicol 1986;10:129. [PubMed: 3018361]
123. Joern WA. J. Anal. Toxicol 1992;16:401. [PubMed: 1338115]
124. Garrett ER, Hunt CA. J. Pharm. Sci 1974;63:1056. [PubMed: 4853640]
125. Huang W, Moody DE, Andrenyak DM, Smith EK, Foltz RL, Huestis MA, Newton JF. J. Anal.
Toxicol 2001;25:531. [PubMed: 11599596]
126. Owens SM, McBay AJ, Reisner HM, Perez-Reyes M. Clin. Chem 1981;27:619. [PubMed: 6258825]
127. Lemberger L, Crabtree RE, Rowe HM. Science 1972;177:62. [PubMed: 5041775]
128. Moeller MR, Doerr G, Warth S. J. Forensic Sci 1992;37:969. [PubMed: 1324293]
129. Feng S, ElSohly MA, Salamone S, Salem MY. J. Anal. Toxicol 2000;24:395. [PubMed: 10999345]
130. Foltz, RL. Advances in Analytical Toxicology. Baselt, RC., editor. Biomedical Publications; Foster
City: 1984. p. 125
131. Green MD, Belanger G, Hum DW, Belanger A, Tephly TR. Drug Metab. Dispos 1997;25:1389.
[PubMed: 9394029]
132. Manno JE, Manno BR, Kemp PM, Alford DD, Abukhalaf IK, McWilliams ME, Hagaman FN,
Fitzgerald MJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 2001;25:538. [PubMed: 11599597]
Huestis
Page 27
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

133. Wall, ME.; Taylor, HL. Marihuana '84: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Cannabis. Harvey,
DJ.; Paton, SW.; Nahas, GG., editors. IRL Press; Oxford: 1984. p. 69
134. Shaw LM, Edling-Owens J, Mattes R. Clin. Chem 1991;37:2062. [PubMed: 1662560]
135. Nebro, W.; Barnes, A.; Gustafson, R.; Moolchan, E.; Huestis, M. results presented at the FBI/SOFT/
TIAFT Meeting; Washington DC. August 2004;
136. Peat, MA. Advances in Analytical Toxicology II. Baselt, RC., editor. Year Book Medical Publishers;
Chicago: 1989. p. 186
137. Hanson VW, Buonarati MH, Baselt RC, Wade NA, Yep C, Biasotti AA, Reeve VC, Wong AS,
Orbanowsky MW. J. Anal. Toxicol 1983;7:96. [PubMed: 6304423]
138. Gjerde H, Beylich KM, Morland J. Accid. Anal. Prev 1993;25:479. [PubMed: 8357462]
139. Mason AP, McBay AJ. J. Forensic Sci 1984;29:987. [PubMed: 6502125]
140. Huestis MA, Henningfield JE, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 1992;16:283. [PubMed: 1338216]
141. Huestis MA, Barnes A, Smith ML. Clin. Chem 2005;51:2289. [PubMed: 16223887]
142. Smith, M.; Nebro, W.; Gustafson, R.; Huestis, M. Annual Meeting of the International Association
of Forensic Toxicologists (TIAFT); Seoul, Korea. August 29 – September 2, 2005; p. 1
143. Ellis GM, Mann MA, Judson BA, Schramm NT, Tashchian A. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther 1985;38:572.
[PubMed: 3902318]
144. Huestis MA, Mitchell JM, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 1995;19:443. [PubMed: 8926739]
145. Wingert WE. Clin. Chem 1997;43:100. [PubMed: 8990229]
146. Hawks, RL. The Cannabinoids: Chemical, Pharmacologic, and Therapeutic Aspects. Agurell, S.;
Dewey, W.; Willette, R., editors. Academic Press; Rockville: 1983. p. 1
147. Manno, JE.; Ferslew, KE.; Manno, BR. The Cannabinoids: Chemical, Pharmacologic, and
Therapeutic Aspects. Agurell, S.; Dewey, WL.; Willette, RE., editors. Harcourt Brace Jonanovich;
Orlando: 1984. p. 281
148. Huestis MA, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 1998;22:445. [PubMed: 9788519]
149. Cone EJ, Lange R, Darwin WD. J. Anal. Toxicol 1998;22:460. [PubMed: 9788521]
150. Lafolie P, Beck O, Blennow G, Boreus L, Borg S, Elwin CE, Karlsson L, Odelius G, Hjemdahl P.
Clin. Chem 1991;37:1927. [PubMed: 1934467]
151. Fraser AD, Worth D. Forensic Sci. Int 2003;137:196. [PubMed: 14609657]
152. Fraser AD, Worth D. Ther. Drug Monit 2002;24:746. [PubMed: 12451292]
153. Fraser AD, Worth D. Forensic Sci. Int 2004;143:147. [PubMed: 15240035]
154. Menkes DB, Howard RC, Spears GFS, Cairns ER. Psychopharmacology 1991;103:277. [PubMed:
1851311]
155. Gross SJ, Soares JR. J. Anal. Toxicol 1978;2:98.
156. Gross SJ, Worthy TE, Nerder L, Zimmermann EG, Soares JR, Lomax P. J. Anal. Toxicol 1985;9:1.
[PubMed: 2984463]
157. Mura P, Kintz P, Papet Y, Ruesch G, Piriou A. Acta Clin. Belg 1999;1:35.
158. Soares JR, Gross SJ. Life Sci 1976;19:1711. [PubMed: 1004131]
159. Soares JR, Grant JD, Gross SJ. NIDA Res. Monograph 1982;42:44.
160. Hawks RL. NIDA Res. Monograph 1982;42:125.
161. Huestis, MA.; Cone, EJ. Drug Abuse Handbook. Karch, SB., editor. CRC Press; Boca Raton: 1998.
p. 799
162. Kintz P, Cirimele V, Ludes B. J. Anal. Toxicol 2000;24:557. [PubMed: 11043659]
163. Huestis MA, Dickerson S, Cone EJ. Am. Acad. Forensic Sci. Annual Meeting 1992:190.
164. Huestis MA, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 2004;28:394. [PubMed: 15516285]
165. Niedbala RS, Kardos KW, Fritch DF, Kardos S, Fries T, Waga J. J. Anal. Toxicol 2001;25:289.
[PubMed: 11499881]
166. Peel HW, Perrigo BJ, Mikhael NZ. J. Forensic Sci 1984;29:185. [PubMed: 6366113]
167. Laloup M, Del Mar Ramirez Fernandez M, Wood M, De Boeck G, Maes V, Samyn N. Forensic Sci.
Int 2006;161:175. [PubMed: 16842950]
168. Jehanli A, Brannan S, Moore L, Spiehler VR. J. Forensic Sci 2001;46:1214. [PubMed: 11569567]
Huestis
Page 28
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

169. Hall BJ, Satterfield-Doerr M, Parikh AR, Brodbelt JS. Anal. Chem 1998;70:1788. [PubMed:
9599579]
170. Walsh JM, Flegel R, Crouch DJ, Cangianelli L, Baudys J. J. Anal. Toxicol 2003;27:429. [PubMed:
14606995]
171. Crouch DJ. Forensic Sci. Int 2005;150:165. [PubMed: 15899565]
172. Crouch DJ, Walsh JM, Flegel R, Cangianelli L, Baudys J, Atkins R. J. Anal. Toxicol 2005;29:244.
[PubMed: 15975256]
173. Quintela O, Crouch DJ, Andrenyak DM. J. Anal. Toxicol 2006;30:614. [PubMed: 17132261]
174. Day D, Kuntz DJ, Feldman M, Presley L. J. Anal. Toxicol 2006;30:645. [PubMed: 17137523]
175. Moore C, Coulter C, Rana S, Vincent M, Soares J. J. Anal. Toxicol 2006;30:409. [PubMed:
16959131]
176. Moore C, Ross W, Coulter C, Adams L, Rana S, Vincent M, Soares J. J. Anal. Toxicol 2006;30:413.
[PubMed: 16959132]
177. Niedbala RS, Kardos KW, Fritch DF, Kunsman KP, Blum KA, Newland GA, Waga J, Kurtz L,
Bronsgeest M, Cone EJ. J. Anal. Toxicol 2005;29:607. [PubMed: 16419389]
178. Kidwell DA, Holland JC, Athanaselis S. J. Chromatogr 1998;713:111.
179. Balabanova S, Schneider E. Beitr. Gerichtl. Med 1989;48:45. [PubMed: 2241828]
180. Samyn N, van Haeren C. Int. J. Legal Med 2000;113:150. [PubMed: 10876986]
181. Kintz P, Brenniesen R, Bundeli P, Mangin P. Clin. Chem 1997;43:736. [PubMed: 9166224]
182. Ehorn, C.; Fretthold, D.; Maharaj, M. Annual Meeting of the International Association of Forensic
Toxicologists (TIAFT); Tampa, U.S.A.. October 31 – November 4, 1994; p. 11
183. Cairns, T.; Kippenberger, DJ.; Scholtz, H.; Baumgartner, WA. In: de Zeeuw, RA.; Al Hosani, I.; Al
Munthiri, S.; Maqbool, A., editors. Hair Analysis in Forensic Toxicology: Proceedings of the 1995
International Conference and Workshop; Abu Dhabi. 1995; Organizing Committee; p. 185
184. Cirimele, V. Drug Testing in Hair. Kintz, P., editor. CRC Press; Boca Raton: 1996. p. 181
185. Kintz P, Cirimele V, Mangin P. J. Forensic Sci 1995;40:619. [PubMed: 7595299]
186. Moore C, Guzaldo F, Donahue T. J. Anal. Toxicol 2001;25:555. [PubMed: 11599599]
187. Moore C, Rana S, Coulter C, Feyerherm F, Prest H. J. Anal. Toxicol 2006;30:171. [PubMed:
16803651]
188. Cirimele V, Sachs H, Kintz P, Mangin P. J. Anal. Toxicol 1996;20:13. [PubMed: 8837945]
189. Huestis MA, Gustafson RA, Moolchan ET, Barnes A, Bourland JA, Sweeney SA, Hayes EF,
Carpenter PM, Smith ML. Forensic Sci. Int 2007;169:129. [PubMed: 16963215]
Huestis
Page 29
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 1.
Mean (N=6) plasma concentrations of THC, 11-OH-THC, and THC-COOH during smoking
of a single cannabis cigarette containing 3.55% of THC. Arrows (↓) indicate one inhalation or
puff on the cannabis cigarette. Reprinted and adapted with permission by Springer-Verlag,
‘Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology’, 2005, p. 660, Fig. 1.
Huestis
Page 30
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 2.
Time-dependent THC concentrations for six individuals (subjects B, C, and E–H) following
smoking of a single cannabis cigarette containing 3.55% of THC. Reprinted and adapted with
permission by Journal of Analytical Toxicology, p. 280 in [14], Fig. 1.
Huestis
Page 31
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 3.
Plasma concentrations (N=1) over 24 h for THC, 11-OH-THC, and THC-COOH following
administration of two doses (2.5 mg each) of synthetic THC (dronabinol) at 4.5 and 10.5 h.
Reprinted and adapted with permission by Elsevier, p. 152 in [32], Fig. 2.
Huestis
Page 32
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 4.
Predictive mathematical models for estimating the elapsed time of last cannabis use based on
plasma THC and THC-COOH concentrations. Reprinted and adapted with permission by
Journal of Analytical Toxicology, p. 285 in [140], Fig. 1.
Huestis
Page 33
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 5.
Urine concentrations of THC-COOH and THC-COOH/creatinine for one subject following
smoking of a single cannabis cigarette containing 3.55% of THC. Reprinted and adapted with
permission by Journal of Analytical Toxicology, p. 450 in [148], Fig. 3.
Huestis
Page 34
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 6.
Excretion patterns of THC in oral fluid and plasma, and urinary THC-COOH/creatinine levels
in a human subject following smoking of a single cannabis cigarette containing 3.55% of THC.
The THC-COOH/creatinine ratio is illustrated for all urine specimens collected through the
last positive specimen. Analyses were performed by GC/MS at cutoff concentrations of 0.5
ng/ml for oral-fluid and plasma samples, and at 15 ng/ml for urine samples, resp. Reprinted
and adapted with permission by Journal of Analytical Toxicology, p. 397 in [164], Fig. 2.
Huestis
Page 35
Chem Biodivers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 2.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript